[TEXT]
Good morning.
Today we're going to review the dynamics portion of the AP Physics C Mechanics Curriculum. You know, Newtons three laws and friction and stuff. Don't say, "And stuff," just say, "Newton's laws and friction."


Billy, what is Newton's First Law? When viewed from an inertial reference frame, an object at rest will remain at rest and an object in motion will remain at a constant velocity
unless acted upon by a net external force.


An inertial reference frame is where the frame of reference has an acceleration of zero. For example, right now, my acceleration is zero, so this is an inertial frame of reference. A non-inertial reference frame is where the accelerationof the frame of reference is not equal to zero. For example, in a car, which is turning, which is a non-inertial reference frame, objects which are at rest on the dashboard will, from the frame of reference of the vehicle,not remain at rest. Newton's first law is also calledthe Law of Inertia. And inertia is the tendency of an object to resist a change in state of motion or to resist acceleration.


Bobby, what is Newton's second law? Newton's second law is an equation, a net force equals mass times acceleration, and remember force and acceleration are both vectors. Yes, that is the form of Newton's second law which I prefer, but you should be aware that has been rearranged on the AP equation sheet to solve for acceleration. 


Bo, what is Newton's third law? Newton's third law is also an equation. For every force object one exerts on object two, object two exerts an equal but opposite force on object one, and force is, of course, a vector. Billy, what are the units for force? Force is in newtons, and newtons are, oh, oh, net force equals mass times acceleration. so a newton is a kilogram times a meter per second squared.


Bobby, name and describe one of the basic forces in dynamics, please. Okay, uh, the Force of Gravity, the symbol is F sub g, and it equals mass times acceleration due to gravity. It is caused by the interaction between the object and the planet, it is always down. Here near the surface of planet earth, the acceleration due to gravity is considered to be a constant positive 9.81 meters per second squared. It is synonymous with weight, so sometimes you will see the symbol capital W used for weight or Force of Gravity and it acts on the center of mass of the object. Actually, it acts on the center of gravity of the object. We live in a constant gravitational field, so the center of gravity and center of mass of an object are in the same place.


Sure. Bo, another force please. The Force Normal F sub N. It is a pushing force caused by a surface. It is normal to or perpendicular to the surface. The Force Normal is always a push,
and it acts on the contact point between the two surfaces. Billy, how about another force? Another Force of Tension, capital F with a subscript of capital T, the Force of Tension is the force caused by a rope, cable, wire, string, or the like. The Force of Tension is always in the direction of the rope or cable, et cetera, and the Force of Tension is always a pull, and sometimes the symbol is just capital T.


There is also the Force Applied, F sub a, which is just the force of one object pushing or pulling on another object. There is a lot we need to know about the Force of Friction, capital F sub lower case f. It is the force caused by the interaction between two surfaces of two objects. And class, what do we know about the direction of the Force of Friction? The Force of Friction is always parallel to the surfaces. It opposes motion. And it is independent of the direction of the Force Applied. Yes, the Force of Friction is always parallel to the surfaces. It always opposes motion, and what that means is it opposes the sliding between the two surfaces. And the Force of Friction, the direction of it is independent of the Force Applied. Sometimes students try to tell me that the Force of Friction is opposite the direction for the Force Applied, and this is not always true. It is true that the Force Applied and the direction of the Force of Friction are independent of one another. The equation on the AP equation sheet is the absolute value of the Force of Friction is less than or equal to mu, the coefficient of friction, times the absolute value of the Force Normal. 


There are two types of friction. Billy, please tell me about one of them. Static Friction is when the two surfaces are not sliding relative to one another, and that equation works out to be the Force of Static Friction is less than or equal to the coefficient of Static Friction times Force Normal, and therefore, the maximum Force of Static Friction equals the coefficient of Static Friction
times Force Normal. Yes, the Force of Static Friction varies in an attempt to prevent the two surfaces from sliding relative to one another.


Bo, the other type of friction, please. There is also Kinetic Friction where the two surfaces do slide relative to one another, and then the equation is just the Force of Kinetic Friction equals mu Kinetic times Force Normal.  Bobby, please tell me more about the Coefficient of Friction. The symbol for the Coefficient of Friction is mu, it is determined through experiment, it has no units. Its value depends upon the materials of the two surfaces which are touching one another. The lowest value it could have is zero, if there is no friction. And usually the maximum is about two, however, there could be circumstances like drag racing tires where a mu could get up to four, but really zero to two is a normal range for the Coefficient of Friction. And the Coefficient of Static Friction is greater than the Coefficient of Kinetic Friction for any two interacting surfaces. That is why it is harder to get something moving than it is to keep something moving.


Now let's talk about Free Body Diagrams or Force Diagrams. Free Body Diagrams or Force Diagrams are diagrams of all the forces acting on objects. Again, only forces appear in Free Body Diagrams. I have five steps to help you solve any Free Body Diagram problem.
Class, step one is Draw the Free Body Diagram. Step two. Break Forces into Components. Step three. Re-draw the Free Body Diagram. Step four. Sum the Forces. And step five.  Sum the Forces Again. One, draw the Free Body Diagram. Do not break any forces into components in your initial Free Body Diagram. These instructions come directly from the AP College Board, so I will repeat, when you draw that first Free Body Diagram, do not break any forces into components. Step two, break forces into components. Step three, redraw the Free Body Diagram. Now, I know many of you are going to feel compelled to skip step number three. Please do not. I have graded copious numbers of problems from students where they skipped step three, where they did not take the extra 20 seconds to redraw the Free Body Diagram, and they made simple mistakes. So, please, redraw the Free Body Diagram. Steps four and five appear to be the same. But they are not. You are summing the forces in two directions which are perpendicular to one another. 


Billy, what are some things you must identify when you sum the forces? Every time you sum the forces, you have to identify positive directions. I thought up was positive and down was negative. And right was positive and left was negative. Yeah, that is true, I guess if the direction is not clear, you need to identify it. Like, if there's a pulley, for example. Makes sense. Okay, okay. You also need to identify which object or objects you are summing the forces on,
and which direction you are summing the forces in. The only time you do not have to identify the direction you are summing the forces in, is when you are summing the forces in all directions simultaneously using unit vectors. Realize the only time you can sum the forces on multiple objects at the same time is if all those objects have the same acceleration. For example, if they are attached, if they are connected via a string, or if one object rests on top of another object. If an object is on an incline, we will often, though not always, break the force of gravity into its components in the parallel and perpendicular directions. And instead of summing the forces in the x and y directions, we will tip the x and y directions so that we sum the forces in the parallel and perpendicular directions. And just so you know, theta in these equations is the incline angle.


Next, let's talk about Translational Equilibrium. Translation Motion is just when an object moves from one location to another. Bobby, what is the condition, what is the equation for Translational Equilibrium? An object is in Translational Equilibrium if the net force acting on the object equals zero. That means the object is not moving. Actually that's not necessarily true. That means the object is not accelerating. Right, because net force equals mass times acceleration, so if the net force equals zero, that means the object has an acceleration of zero. Which means the object is either moving at a constant velocity or is not moving at all. But it could be not moving. True, but it could be moving at a constant velocity. 


Another force we need to talk about is the Drag Force
or the Force of Resistance. The symbol for the resistive force is F sub R or capital R, or F sub D. It is the force of drag caused by the interaction between the object and the fluid
through which the object is moving. The direction of the Drag Force is opposite the direction of motion of the object, and when the object is moving through the air, this is often called air resistance. For small objects moving at slow speeds, the force of drag is equal to the negative of the Proportionality Constant times the velocity of the object. Now, what are slow speeds and what's a small object? Really, the only way to know is to determine it experimentally. So for purposes of the AP test, they would either have to tell you it's true, or give you information and ask you to prove that it is true. 


Bo, please give me the equation that we use most often for the Force of Drag. Usually the Force of Drag equals 1/2 times capital D, the drag coefficient of the object, which has no dimensions, is experimentally determined, and depends on the shape and surface texture of the object, times rho, the density of the medium through which the object is moving, times capital A, the cross sectional area of the object, normal to the direction the object is moving, times v, the velocity of the object squared. A common mistake here is to use the density of the object. Remember, rho is the density of the medium through which the object is traveling.


Our last subject is Terminal Velocity. Billy, what is Terminal Velocity? Terminal Velocity is when an object moving through a fluid has reached translational equilibrium. May I derive the equation
for the Terminal Velocity of a object which is falling downward in the atmosphere? Sure, Billy, go ahead. Okay, the Free Body Diagram of the object has the force of gravity straight down, and the resistive force straight up. Summing the forces on the object in the y direction equals the resistive force minus the force of gravity, and that all equals mass times acceleration in the y direction. Substituting in the equations gives us 1/2 times the drag coefficient of the object times the density of the air times a cross sectional area of the object times the velocity of the object squared minus the mass of the object times the acceleration due to gravity, which all equals the mass of the object times the acceleration of the object in the y direction. We can divide by mass to solve for the acceleration of the object. And you can see that in the absence of air resistance, the acceleration of the object would be equal to the negative of the acceleration due to gravity, as it should, because it would be in free fall. Okay, but terminal velocity, the terminal velocity means the acceleration of the object is equal to zero, so we can solve the equation for terminal velocity, which equals the square root of two times mass times acceleration due to gravity divided by the quantity drag coefficient times density times cross sectional area.


There. We derived the equation for the terminal velocity of an object which is falling downward through a fluid. Yes, however, please realize this is not the only equation for terminal velocity. This is the equation for terminal velocity in this specific case. A rocket accelerating upward, for example, would have a different terminal velocity equation.


This brings us to the end of my review of dynamics. Next you could enjoy my review of work, energy, and power, or you could visit my AP Physics C Review webpage. Thank you very much for learning with me today, I enjoyed learning with you.


[SMRY]
Newton’s 1st Law: When viewed from an inertial reference frame, an object at rest will remain at rest and an object in motion will remain at a constant velocity unless acted upon by a net external force. An inertial reference frame is where the acceleration of the reference frame zero. A non-inertial reference frame is where the acceleration of the reference frame is not zero. Also called the “Law of Inertia”. Inertia is the tendency of an object to resist acceleration.

Newton’s Second Law: net force equals mass times acceleration, where force and acceleration are both vectors. Units are kilogram times a meter per second squared.


Newton’s Third Law: For every force object one exerts on object two, object two exerts an equal but opposite force on object one, where force is a vector.

Basic forces in Dynamics: 
1. Force of Gravity (F sub g or W) = mass times acceleration due to gravity
The force of gravity is caused by the interaction between the object and the planet and acts downard. The acceleration due to gravity, g, on planet Earth is +9.81 meters per second squared. The force of gravity acts on the center of gravity/mass of the object. 
2.  Force Normal (F sub n) : A pushing force caused by a surface
The force normal is normal to (perpendicular to) the surface and acts at a contact point between two surfaces.  The force normal is always a push. (Never a pull. A surface can’t “pull”.) 
3. Force of Tension (F sub T): The force caused by a rope, cable, wire, string, etc.
Always in the direction of the rope, cable, wire, string, etc.  Always a pull. (Never a push. You can’t “push” with a rope.)  
4. Force Applied (F sub A): The force of one object pushing or pulling on another object.
5. Force of Friction (F sub f) : The force caused by the interaction between two surfaces.
Force of friction is always parallel to the surface, opposes motion, and is independent of the direction of the Force Applied. Force of Static Friction is less than or equal to the coefficient of Static Friction times Force Normal. Force of Kinetic Friction equals mu Kinetic times Force Normal. The coefficient of friction, , is an experimentally determined, dimensionless number which depends on the materials of the two interacting surfaces.
6. The Drag Force or the Resistive Force (F sub d or F sub r or R) : The force caused by the interaction of an object and the fluid the object is moving through.
Opposite the direction of motion of the object. Force of Drag equals 1/2 times capital D, the drag coefficient of the object times rho, the density of the medium through which the object is moving, times capital A, the cross sectional area of the object, normal to the direction the object is moving, times v, the velocity of the object squared.
7. Terminal Velocity of an object falling downward through a fluid: when an object moving through a fluid has reached translational equilibrium. 
V sub terminal equals square root of two times mass times acceleration due to gravity divided by the quantity drag coefficient times density times cross sectional area


Free Body Diagrams or Force Diagrams: The five steps are
1. Draw the Free Body Diagram(s).
2. Break forces into components. 
3. Redraw the Free Body Diagram(s). 
4. Sum the forces (parallel to direction of motion)
5. Sum the forces (perpendicular to direction of motion) 
You might need to break forces into the x and y components using trigonometry.


Translational Equilibrium: the net force acting on the object equals zero, the acceleration also equals zero. 


[TEXT] 
Good morning. Today we are going to review the work, energy, and power portions of the AP Physics C Mechanics curriculum. 


Bobby, what is the equation for the work done by a constant force? Work done by a constant force equals the dot product of the force doing the work and the displacement of the object. Or force times displacement times the cosine of the angle between the force and the displacement using only the magnitudes of the force and displacement vectors. That's what the dot product means. Yeah. Work is a scalar. 


Let's do a simple example. If the force acting on an object is 2.7i minus 3.1j newtons and the displacement of the object is 4.6i meters, Billy, what is the work done by the force on this object? Work equals the dot product of force and displacement, so it equals the dot product of 2.7i minus 3.1j, and 4.6i plus 0j. Multiply the i's together, multiply the j's together and take the sum. So it is 2.7 times 4.6 plus the negative 3.1 times zero, or 12.42, which is twelve with two significant digits. Oh, and it's in joules. Notice the dot product multiplies the component of the force which is in the direction of the displacement of the object, with the displacement of the object. In this particular case, the component in the direction of the displacement of the object is 2.7 newtons multiplied by the displacement of the object of 4.6 meters. The component normal to the direction of the displacement in this particular case, 3.1 newtons in the negative y direction, does no work on the object, again because it is at a 90 degree angle to the displacement of the object. And yes, Billy, the units for work are joules.


Bobby, what is a joule? A joule is a newton times a meter. And a newton is a kilogram meter per second. Squared. A newton is a kilogram meter per second squared. The work done by a force which is not constant uses a different equation. That work is equal to the integral from position initial to position final of the force with respect to position. This is called a definite integral. Which simply means the integral has limits. In this particular case, from the initial position to the final position. Bo, the derivative represents the slope of a function. What does the integral, or what we also call the antiderivative, represent? An integral, or antiderivative, represents the area under the curve, and the area under the curve means the area between the curve and the horizontal axis. An area above the horizontal axis is positive. The area below the horizontal axis is negative. Notice how we have two different equations for work. We use one equation for work when the force is constant. We use a different equation for work when the force is not constant, and that equation uses an integral. This is going to happen a lot in this class, where we use one equation when the item does not vary. We use a different equation for that same item when it does vary and that equation uses an integral. Please pay attention to that.


Now let's talk about the force caused by a spring: Hooke's Law. The force of a spring equals negative kx. Bobby, can you please clarify all of these letters? K is the spring constant, and it is a measure of how much force it takes to compress or expand the spring per meter. Delta x is the displacement of the spring from equilibrium position, or rest position, which is where the spring would be if it were not being compressed or elongated. The negative has to do with
the direction of the force of the spring. It means the force of the spring is opposite the direction of the displacement of the spring, and the units for the spring constant are usually newton meters. Actually, it's newtons per meter. The spring constant is in newtons per meter. Joules are newtons times meters. Thanks. I always mess that up. You are welcome. Billy, which of the two work equations do we use when determining the work done by the force of a spring? Well, that would depend on whether the force caused by a spring is constant or varies. The force caused by a spring changes with position, so it is not constant. Right, therefore the work done by a spring equals the intergral from position initial to position final of the force of the spring with respect to position. 


Bobby, please determine the work done by a spring. Well, the equation for the spring force is the negative of the spring constant times the displacement from equilibrium position. The integral of x to the first power with the respect to x is x squared over two, so we have negative kx squared over two from position initial to position final. Substituting in our limits gives us way too many negatives, so I'm going to factor out a negative one, and one half kx squared is elastic potential energy, so that is the negative of elastic potential energy final minus elastic potential energy initial, or the negative of the change in elastic potential energy of the spring. The work done by a spring force equals the negative of the change in elastic potential energy of the spring. That's pretty cool.


Previously we derived the net work kinetic energy theorem. We're not going to do that derivation right now, however you're more than welcome to review it by clicking on the link which just appeared. It was during that derivation where we defined kinetic energy. Kinetic energy equals one half times the mass of the object times the velocity of the object squared. The AP equation sheet just uses the capital letter K. I prefer capital KE so that you don't confuse the spring constant with kinetic energy. 


Gravitational potential energy equals the mass of the object times the acceleration due to gravity times h, the vertical height above the horizontal zero line. Please, don't ask me why the symbol for gravitational potential energy is a capital U. I don't know. Please remember whenever you use gravitational potential energy, you have to identify the horizontal zero line. This is the reference line for the vertical height h. The equation on the AP equation sheet is instead in terms of the change in gravitational potential energy. Energy can neither be created nor can it be destroyed. Therefore, in a system which is not isolated. The change in energy of a system equals the sum of the energy which is transferred into or out of the system. 


Bo, this is important. Could you please review it for us? When we have a non-isolated system, which means a system which is receiving energy or having energy taken away from it, the change in energy of the system equals the addition of all the energy which is transferred into or out of the system. It actually makes a lot of sense if you think about it because you cannot create or destroy energy. The energy has to come from or go somewhere. Right. Now, if the system is isolated then no energy is transferred into or out of the system, therefore the change in energy of the system must be zero. The change in energy of the system equals the change in mechanical energy of the system plus the change in internal energy of the system which add up to zero.


The change in internal energy of the system equals the negative of the work done by non conservative forces. And remember, the work done by a conservative force does not depend on the path taken by the object. The work done by a nonconservative force does depend on the path taken by the object. Therefore, the work done by nonconservative forces equals the change in mechanical energy of the system. Because the only non conservative force that I know of is friction, I usually write this equation as: The work due to friction equals the change in mechanical energy of the system. And remind me, Bobby, what needs to be true for the work due to friction to be equal to the change in mechanical energy of the system? There needs to be no energy transferred into or out of the system. The system needs to be isolated. Don't confuse the work due to friction equals change in mechanical energy equation with the net work equals change in kinetic energy equation. They do look similar. Net work equals change in mechanical energy is not the same as work due to non conservative forces equals change in mechanical energy. And if the system is isolated and no work is done by friction, then the change in mechanical energy equals zero, which works out to be conservation of mechanical energy.


Class, remind me, what do you need to identify whenever you use conservation of mechanical energy or work due to friction equals change in mechanical energy? Initial point. Final point. Horizontal zero line. Remember, just like work, all of these formsof mechanical energy are in joules. Now let's talk about power. Power is the rate at which work is done. Therefore, average power equals work over change in time. Instantaneous power equals the derivative of work with respect to time. I will point out that the equation for power in terms of work on the AP equation sheet is: Power equals the derivative of energy with respect to time.Now, substituting in the equation for work done by a constant force gives us the derivative with respect to time of the dot product of the force and the displacement of the object. But the force is constant, so this is really just the derivative of the position with respect to time, which is velocity. Therefore, the power delivered by a constant force on an object in terms of velocity is the dot product of force and velocity.


Bo, what are the SI units for power? Power… Is in horsepower? Horsepower is the English unit for power. Watts are the SI unit for power. Right, and 746 watts equals one horsepower. Watts are joules per second. But we don't have to memorize that there are 746 watts in one horsepower, right? You are correct that you do not need to remember how many watts are in a horsepower. What you do need to remember is that every derivative is an integral, or an antiderivative. For example, power equals the derivative of work with respect to time can be rearranged to dw equals power times dt. Taking the definite integral of both sides gives the change in work equals the integral from time initial to time final of power with respect to time. Which means if you have a graph of the power exerted on an object with respect to time, the area under that curve will be equal to the change in work exerted on that object. Which could be very helpful.So please remember, every derivative can be rearranged as an integral, and every integralcan be rearranged as a derivative.


Billy, what is the equation which is not on your AP equation sheet which has to do with conservative forces? There's an equation which has to do with conservative forces which is not on our equation sheet? I did not know that. It's a pickle. Pickle? A conservative force equals the negative of the derivative of the potential energy associated with that conservative force. As a side note, you have to know this equation because much of the time, when the phrase "conservative force" is used on the AP Exam, this is the equation you need to use. Capeesh? Capiscilo! Yeah. Ich verstehe.


For example, for a spring, the force of a spring equals the negative of the derivative of the elastic potential energy associated with that spring with respect to position. We can substitute in the equation for elastic potential energy, and Bo, could you please take that derivative? The derivative of x squared with respect to x is two times x. 1/2 times two is one. So the force of a spring equals negative k times x. But we already know that, don't we? Well Bo, that is my point.
Right.


Billy, could you please do the same thing with the force of gravity? The force of gravity equals the negative of the derivative of gravitational potential energy with respect to position. However that position is going to be in the y direction because the force of gravity is in the y direction. For gravitational potential energy, we can substitute in mass times acceleration due to gravity times vertical height above the horizontal zero line. Although, let's use y for that instead of an H to match the variable we used for position. Mass and acceleration due to gravity are constants, and the derivative of y with respect to y is just one. So the force of gravity equals the negative of mass times acceleration due to gravity. Why is it negative? The force of gravity is always down. That's why it is negative. Oh, okay. That makes sense.


Now let's talk about neutral, stable, and unstable equilibrium. This ball is in neutral equilibrium because the gravitational potential energy of the ball remains constant, regardless of its position. So the graph of the gravitational potential energy of the ball with respect to position is a horizontal line because the gravitational potential energy is constant. This water bottle is in stable equilibrium because its gravitational potential energy increases as its position moves away from the equilibrium position. This is because the center of mass of the water bottle goes up as the position goes away from equilibrium. In other words, the water bottle naturally returns back to the equilibrium position when it loses gravitational potential energy. This dry erase marker is in unstable equilibrium because its gravitational potential energy decreases as its position moves away from the equilibrium position. This is because the center of mass of the dry erase marker goes down as the position goes away from equilibrium. In other words, the dry erase marker naturally moves away from the equilibrium position when it loses gravitational potential energy. That completes my review of work energy and power. 


Next, feel free to enjoy my review of integrals in kinematics for AP Physics C. Or you can visit my AP Physics C Review webpage. Thank you very much for learning with me today. I enjoyed learning with you.


[SMRY]
Work done by a constant force: force times displacement times the cosine of the angle between the force and the displacement using only the magnitudes of the force and displacement vectors. Work is a scalar because it is the dot product of force and displacement.

Work done by a nonconstant force: the integral from position initial to position final of the force with respect to position.  This is a definite integral because it has defined limits. 


The force of a spring equals negative kx. k is the “spring constant” and is a measure of how much force it takes to compress or expand a spring per meter. x is the displacement of the spring from equilibrium position. The negative means the force of the spring is opposite the direction of the displacement of the spring. The work done by a spring force equals the negative of the change in elastic potential energy of the spring.


Total work is equal to the change in kinetic energy which equals one half times the mass of the object times the velocity of the object squared. 

Gravitational Potential Energy (U) in a constant gravitational field equals the mass of the object times the acceleration due to gravity times h, the vertical height above the horizontal zero line. The change in energy of the system equals the change in mechanical energy of the system plus the change in internal energy of the system which add up to zero.

Power is the rate at which work is done. Average power equals work over change in time. Instantaneous power equals the derivative of work with respect to time.

A conservative force equals the negative of the derivative of the potential energy associated with that conservative force. 

Neutral Equilibrium is where the Potential Energy of the object remains constant regardless of position. For example, a ball rolling on a level surface. • Stable Equilibrium is where the 


Potential Energy of the object increases as the position of the object moves away from the equilibrium position and therefore the object naturally returns to the equilibrium position. For example, a water bottle being tipped to the side. • Unstable Equilibrium is where the Potential 


Energy of the object decreases as the position of the object moves away from the equilibrium position and therefore the object naturally moves away from the equilibrium position. For example, a marker being tipped to the side.

[TEXT]
Good morning. Today we are going to review momentum, impulse, collisions, and center of mass as a part of the AP Physics C Mechanics curriculum. 
Bo, what is the equation for momentum? Momentum equals mass times velocity. We should point out, momentum is a lower-case p, power is an upper-case P. And momentum and velocity are vectors. And units for momentum are kilograms, meters per second. And the units have no special name, they are just kilogram meters per second. Unlike newtons, which are kilograms meters per second squared.


Okay. Billy, what is Newton's second law in terms of momentum? The sum of the forces acting on an object or system of objects equals the derivative of the momentum of that object or system of objects, with respect to time. Don't forget, force and momentum are vectors. Yeah. Because momentum equals mass times velocity, we can use the product rule to get. Net force equals the derivative of mass with respect to time times velocity, plus mass times the derivative of velocity with respect to time. And, we know the derivative of velocity with respect to time equals acceleration, therefore, Bobby, when we use the net force equals mass times acceleration as Newton's second law, what were we assuming? Well, that would mean the derivative of mass with respect to time was zero.  Sure, Bobby, but what does that really mean about the object? Oh, that means the mass of the object is not changing, I get it. Net force equals mass times acceleration assumes the mass of the object is constant. 


Billy, when can we use conservation of momentum? We can use conservation of momentum when all the forces are internal to the system. That is correct, but can you prove it? Sure, uh, if all the forces are internal to the system, then the sum of the external forces acting on the system equals zero, and the derivative of the momentum of the system with respect to time equals zero. And if the derivative of the momentum of the system with respect to time equals zero, then the momentum of the system is not changing as a function of time, so the sum of the initial momenta equals the sum of the final momenta. It is also useful to realize momentum is conserved during all collisions and explosions. Because all the forces are internal to the system during collisions and explosions. 


Now let's derive the equation for impulse, which is often called the impulse momentum theorem. We start by looking at the net force acting on an object, and using the equation we were just working with, we can rearrange that to get net force times dt is equal to dp. And then we can take the definite integral of the whole equation. The limits when  taking the integral with respect to time go from time initial to time final. And the limits when taking the integral with respect to momentum go from momentum initial, to momentum final. The definite integral of one with respect to momentum is momentum final, minus momentum initial, which is change in momentum. In other words, the change in momentum equals the definite integral from time initial to time final of the net force with respect to time. Which is defined as impulse, and the symbol for impulse is a capital J, and impulse, just like momentum, is a vector. Because impulse is force times time, the units for impulse are Newton's seconds. 


Mr. P? And, yes, Billy, the units for impulse, Newton's seconds, are equivalent to the units for momentum, kilogram meters per second. I was going to ask that. Yeah, I know. Remember, integrals are the area under the curve. Therefore, impulse is the area between
the net force as a function of time curve, and the horizontal time axis, where area above the time axis is positive, and the area below the time axis is negative. Also, do not confuse impulse with work. Work is the definite integral of force with respect to position, not time. The two equations are very similar to one another. Okay, Bo, what is the impulse approximation? The impulse approximation is where we can say the force of impact during the collision is so large that it overshadows all the other forces, and therefore the net force is approximately equal to the force of impact during the collision. Uh, that is true with large forces of impact, which usually last for a short time interval. Sadly, impact force and impulse often get confused with one another, perhaps it's because they both start with 'imp', I don't know. If we can consider the force of impact to be constant, or we have the average force of impact, the impulse is equal to the average force of impact times the change in time. This gives us a rectangle with the same area as the definite integral impulse equation. 


Now let's review the types of collisions. Bobby, please explain this table. This table lists two types of collisions, elastic and inelastic. Momentum is conserved during all types of collisions, so the difference between elastic and inelastic collisions is whether kinetic energy is conserved. And kinetic energy is conserved during elastic collisions, and kinetic energy is not conserved during inelastic collisions. What about perfectly inelastic collisions? Yes, a perfectly inelastic collision is where the two objects run into one another and stick together afterwards. I've also seen a perfectly inelastic collision referred to as a completely or totally inelastic collision. Be aware that collisions between hard spheres are considered to be elastic collisions generally, in physics classes. And in the real world, most collisions are actually inelastic, where some kinetic energy is converted to heat and sound during the collisions.


Okay, next let's talk about center of mass. The position of the center of mass of a system of particles is equal to the sum of the mass of each particle, multiplied by the location of each particle, all divided by the total mass of the system. In other words, if we are solving for the center of mass of a system of particles in the X direction, that is equal to the mass of object one, multiplied by the X position of object one relative to a zero reference line, which often is, but does not have to be, the origin, plus the mass of object two, times the location of object two, again in the X direction relative to the zero reference line, plus however many objects we have, we repeat that that many times, all divided by the total mass of the system of particles.


The velocity of the center of mass of a system of particles is equal to the derivative of the position of the center of mass of the system of particles with respect to time. And because the mass of the system of particles does not change, and the derivative of position with respect to time is velocity, the equation for the velocity of the center of mass of the system of particles is almost identical to the equation for the position of the center of mass of a system of particles, you simply replace position with velocity. And, we can do the same thing to determine the acceleration of the center of mass of a system of particles. Because the derivative of velocity with respect to time is acceleration, the equation for the acceleration of the center of mass of a system of particles is almost identical to the equation for the velocity of the center of mass of a system of particles. You simply replace velocity with acceleration. Now, realize the only one of these three equations which is on the AP equation sheet, which you're going to get on the exam, is the equation for the position of the center of mass of a system of particles. The equations for velocity and acceleration of the center of mass of a system of particles are not on the AP equation sheet.


Now let's talk about finding the center of mass of a rigid system of particles, or what is more commonly called a rigid object with shape. The position of the center of mass of a rigid object with shape, is equal to one over the total mass of the object, times the integral, with respect to mass, of the location of all of those infinitesimally small pieces of that object, which are called dm, relative to a zero reference line. Could you please say that again? Yeah, yeah, please. Please. What is 'r'? Uh, sure, I'll start with 'r'. Now, 'r' is a position vector, just like we used in kinematics, and it describes the position of an object in one, two or three dimensional space. And, so here it's describing the location of all of these dms. And when we're figuring out the position center of mass, we usually only determine that in one dimensional space,
so we usually replace it with something we're more familiar with, like X. So in this case, X is defined as, in the same way it was for a system of particles, it is the location of all of the different pieces of the system, in this case, the system is the object, so we break the object into an infinitely large number of infinitesimally small pieces, dm. That's right, that's what an integral is. Exactly, that is what an integral is. And this particular integral is not on your AP equation sheet, I don't know why, it's just not there. That does not help me out at all. I know, um. Okay, so. 


On to more things which are not on the AP equation sheet. Volumetric mass density equals the mass of the object,  divided by its volume. The symbol for volumetric mass density is
the lower-case Greek letter rho, and just so you know, I put a slash through my V for volume, to distinguish volume from velocity. Surface mass density is the mass of the object divided by its surface, and the symbol for surface mass density is the lower-case Greek letter sigma. And linear mass density equals the mass of the object, divided by its length. And the symbol for linear mass density is the lower-case Greek letter lambda. Did he really say none of those are on the equation sheet? Yep. Oh. He did. These equations for density tend to be helpful when determining the center of mass of rigid objects with shape, although I will admit that sigma, the surface mass density, I have yet to see be used in AP Physics C Mechanics, however, in AP Physics C, electricity and magnetism, the surface charge density is used, and I thought y'all should start getting used it. Thank you. Sure.


That completes my review of momentum, impulse, collisions, and center of mass. Next feel free to enjoy my review of rotational kinematics for AP Physics C Mechanics, or you can visit my AP Physics C review webpage. Thank you very much for learning with me today, I enjoyed learning with you.


[SMRY]
Momentum (p) equals mass times velocity


Newton’s second law in terms of momentum is change in momentum over change in time. When all the forces are internal to the system, the net force equals zero, the derivative of momentum as a function of time is zero, therefore the momentum does not change, therefore momentum is conserved. Momentum is conserved during collisions and explosions.

The impulse is equal to the average force times the change in time or the integral of force over a period of time. Symbol for Impulse is J and it is a vector. Impulse is the area “under” a force as a function of time curve. Collisions between hard spheres are “nearly” elastic and therefore are generally considered to be elastic in physics classes. “Perfectly Inelastic” Collisions are where the objects stick to one another. Sometimes they are called “Completely Inelastic” or “Totally Inelastic”. These terms all mean the same thing. Most collisions are actually Inelastic.


The position of the center of mass of a system of particles is equal to the sum of the mass of each particle, multiplied by the location of each particle, all divided by the total mass of the system. The position of the center of mass of an object with shape equals one over the total mass of the object times the integral with respect to mass of the position of all of the infinitesimally small pieces of the object, which are called dm, relative to a zero-reference line. 

[TEXT]
Good morning, today we're going to review rotational kinematics as a part of the AP Physics C mechanics curriculum. 


Billy what are the equations for average and instantaneous angular velocity? The symbol for angular velocity is the lower case Greek letter omega, and it looks like a curly w. Average angular velocity equals the change in angular position over change in time and instantaneous angular velocity velocity equals the derivative of the angular position with respect to time. And, the units for angular velocity are usually radians per second when we use them in physics. However, angular velocity is often in revolutions per minute in the "real world".


Bo, what about angular acceleration? The symbol for angular acceleration is alpha-Fishy thing. Fishy thing. Some of us call alpha fishy thing. Average angular acceleration is change in angular velocity over change in time. Instantaneous angular acceleration is the derivative of angular velocity with respect to time. And, the units for angular acceleration are radians per second squared.


Now, let's talk about uniformly angularly accelerated motion.  U fishy m. That's right, u fishy m. These equation work just like the uniformly accelerated motion equations and you can use them whenever the angular acceleration is constant. Class, there are how many u fishy m variables?  Five. And, how many u fishy m equations?  Four. If you know how many of the u fishy m variables?  Three. You can find the other?  Two. Which leaves you with one?  Happy physics student. I don't know why only the first two of the u fishy m equations appear on the AP equation sheet. And, I know that those equations on the AP equation sheet look a little bit different than the ones that I have listed here, but we already discussed those differences during the kinematics review, so I'm not gonna do it again.
Bobby, what is the equation for arc length, and what is arc length? The equation for arc length is s equals r delta theta where s is the arc length, r is the radius of the object moving along an arc, and delta theta is the angular displacement of the object. But, he uses a weird s for arc length. Mr. P. uses a lowercase cursive s because his esses and fives look identical. Yeah, so s for arc length, and arc length is the linear distance traveled by an object when it is moving along part of a circle or arc. 


Remember, you must use radians for the angular displacement when using the equation for arc length. And, speaking of radians, one revolution equals 360 degrees which equals 2 pi radians. And because arc length is a linear measurement it has linear units like meters, centimeters, millimeters, et cetera.


Bobby, please take the derivative of the entire arc length equation with respect to time. Okay, arc length equals radius times angular displacement, take the derivative of that equation with respect to time. That means we have the derivative of arc length with respect to time equals, well let's assume r is constant so r doesn't change with respect to time. So, it is r times the derivative of change in angular position, actually we need to take the derivative of just the angular position with respect to time. The derivative of arc length with respect to time is a linear velocity when moving along a circle. That's tangential velocity. Right, and the derivative of theta, or angular position with respect to time is angular velocity. So, we now have tangential velocity equals radius times angular velocity. Tangential velocity is the linear velocity of an object moving in a circle. And, it has linear units, so meters per second in base SI units.


Bo, please take the derivative of the entire tangential velocity equation with respect to time. The derivative with respect to time of the equation tangential velocity equals radius times angular velocity is, well the derivative of tangential velocity with respect to time is tangential acceleration. And, the derivative of angular velocity with respect to time is angular acceleration. So, assuming the radius stays constant tangential acceleration equals radius times angular acceleration. Tangential acceleration is the linear acceleration of an object when it's moving in a circle. So, it has linear units, meters per second squared in base SI units. And, both of these tangential quantities, tangential velocity and tangential acceleration are tangent to the circle the object is describing. This means they're also perpendicular to the radius of the circle the path of the object is describing. Now, I don't know why however, the equation of tangential velocity is
the only one of these three equations which does appear on the AP equation sheet.
However, it's relatively easy to remember the other two if you can remember how they are derived. And, just like when using the equation for arc length when using the equations for tangential velocity and tangential acceleration you must use radians for the angular quantities.


Now, let's take a look at the motion of this sphere on a string. We're going to assume this sphere on a string is moving with zero angular acceleration. When the angular acceleration of an object equals zero the motion of the object is called Uniform Circular Motion. Considering the angular acceleration of this sphere is zero class is the angular velocity of the sphere constant? Yes. Yes, an angular acceleration of zero means the sphere has a constant angular velocity. Class is the linear velocity, or the tangential velocity of the sphere on the string constant? No. Zero. Yes? Okay, let's try something slightly different. Class, is the tangential speed of the sphere constant?  Yes. Correct. Is the magnitude of the tangential velocity
of the sphere constant?  Yes. Correct. Is the tangential velocity of the sphere constant? Yes. No. No, the direction of the tangential velocity is changing the whole time, and tangential velocity is a vector. So, if the direction of the tangential velocity is changing, then the tangential velocity is changing. Correct. Because the direction of the tangential velocity is not constant the tangential velocity is changing. And, because the tangential velocity is changing there must be a linear acceleration causing that change in velocity. The linear acceleration which causes circular motion is called centripetal acceleration and centripetal means center seeking. So, the centripetal acceleration is the acceleration which is in toward the center of the circle, which the path of the object is describing. 


The equation for centripetal acceleration is tangential velocity squared divided by the radius of the path the object is describing. It also equals that radius times the angular velocity squared. Now, according to Newton's Second Law where there is a linear acceleration there must be a net force. Therefore, if an object is moving in a circle there must be a centripetal acceleration and there must be a centripetal force. The centripetal force is the net force in the in direction. I'll say that again. When an object is moving along a circular path there must be a net force acting inward on the object and that net force in the in direction is called the centripetal force. It is equal to, according to Newton's Second Law, mass times the acceleration in the in direction. And, the acceleration in the in direction acting on the object is called the centripetal acceleration.


Class, what three things did I ask you to remember about the net force in the in direction,
the centripetal force? It's not a new force. So, it's never in a Free Body Diagram. The inward direction is positive, and therefore the outward direction is negative.I would do the conical pendulum example right now, however we already did that during our AP Physics 1 review,
so let's not do it again. But, you can watch the link if you want. Let's now talk about non-uniform circular motion. Billy, what needs to be true to have non-uniform circular motion.  The angular acceleration of the object needs to not be equal to zero.  When the angular acceleration is non-zero then the object has not only a centripetal acceleration which is directed in towards the center of the circle but also a tangential acceleration which is tangent to the path the object is describing.


This means the acceleration of an object in non-uniform circular motion is the sum of both the centripetal and tangential accelerations. The object in non-uniform circular motion will have a total acceleration which has a direction which is between the direction tangent to the circle
and the inward direction.


 Okay, when an object has an angular acceleration it will then have both a centripetal acceleration and a tangential acceleration and therefore it will have a net acceleration which is the sum of those two accelerations. Yeah, that makes sense.  Let's return back to the equation
for angular velocity. Bobby, what was the equation for angular velocity, again please? Average angular velocity or omega equals change in angular position or change in theta or angular displacement divided by change in time. And Bo, if an object has traveled through one full circle how many radians has it traveled through? One revolution is 360 degrees which is two radians. Two pi radians. Right, two pi radians. Thanks. It's okay. And, the time for one full revolution is called the period of the object and it has a symbol of capital T. Therefore the angular velocity of an object equals two pi divided by the period of the object which we could rearrange to get period equals two pi divided by the angular velocity of the object which does appear on the AP equation sheet.


That completes my review of rotational kinematics. Next, please enjoy my review of rotational dynamics. Or, you could visit my AP Physics C review webpage. Thank you very much for learning with me today, I enjoyed learning with you.


[SMRY]
Average angular velocity (omega or curly w) equals the change in angular position over change in time and instantaneous angular velocity velocity equals the derivative of the angular position with respect to time. Units are radians per second.


Average angular acceleration (alpha or fishy thing) is change in angular velocity over change in time. Instantaneous angular acceleration is the derivative of angular velocity with respect to time. Units are radians per second squared.


Uniformly Angularly Accelerated Motion: u fishy m. And, how many u fishy m equations?  Four. If you know how many of the u fishy m variables?  Three. You can find the other?  Two. Which leaves you with one?  Happy physics student.


Arc length, s, is the linear length when traveling along an arc. The equation for arc length is s equals r delta theta where s is the arc length, r is the radius of the object moving along an arc, and delta theta is the angular displacement of the object.


Tangential velocity (meters per second) equals radius times angular velocity. Tangential acceleration (meters per second squared) equals radius times angular acceleration.

Uniform Circular Motion is where objects move in a circle with an angular acceleration of zero. Even though the magnitude of the object’s velocity does not change, the direction of the velocity does, that means the velocity is not constant, therefore there must be an acceleration. The acceleration responsible for this change in the direction of the velocity is called centripetal acceleration, ac.


According to Newton’s 2nd law, where there is an acceleration, there must be a net force. Therefore, if an object is moving in a circle, there is a centripetal acceleration and there must be a centripetal force. Centripetal force is equal to mass times centripetal acceleration. It is never in a free body diagram. The “in” direction is positive. (The “out” direction is negative).


Non-Uniform Circular Motion will have an angular acceleration which is nonzero. This means there will also be a tangential acceleration, a sub t, which is parallel to the tangential velocity and normal to the centripetal acceleration.

The period, T, of an object moving in a circle is the time it takes for one revolution.

[TEXT]
Good morning. Let's begin our review of the entire AP Physics C: Mechanics Curriculum, and we will start with kinematics. 
Class, dimensions are our Friends! In other words, we have to remember the units for everything and we have to identify every number answer with units. Unless it doesn't have units! Like Mu. Yeah. Correct. It also means we have to be able to do conversions.


Bobby, please convert the density of the gas krypton, at standard temperature and pressure of 3.75 grams per centimeter cubed, to kilograms per meter cubed. Okay, multiply by 100 centimeters over one meter, and cube it to cancel out centimeters cubed, and multiply by one kilogram over 1000 grams to cancel out grams, and we now have 0.375 kilograms per meter cubed. And now vectors versus scalars.  Mr. P? Yes, Bo? That answer is not right. It should be 3,750 kilograms per meter cubed. I think Bobby forgot to cube the numbers as well as the units. Yeah, that's right. Bo, thank you, that is absolutely correct. Students will sometimes forget to apply an exponent which is outside the parentheses to everything which is inside the parentheses. I see it all the time. Okay. 


Class, a vector has both Magnitude and direction. And a scalar has?  Magnitude only. This difference might seem minor, however, it comes up on every AP Physics exam. One example is that momentum is a vector and students will sometimes forget
to include both the x and y directions when solving a conservation of momentum problem. Billy, what is the equation for velocity? Are you asking for average or instantaneous velocity?  That is an awesome question, Billy. Please give me both. Okay. Average velocity is change in position over change in time, and instantaneous velocity is the derivative of position as a function of time. And Bo, what is the difference between average and instantaneous? Average means over a time period, and instantaneous means at a specific point in time.  And what does the derivative represent? The derivative gives the slope of a line. We can also write out the equations for average and instantaneous acceleration. Average acceleration equals the change in velocity over change in time and instantaneous acceleration equals the derivative of velocity with respect to time.


Now, let's talk about Uniformly Accelerated Motion, or UAM. We can use the UAM equations when the acceleration of the object is uniform or constant. In other words, when the acceleration equals a number, not an equation, which changes as a function of time or position. Bo, what are the five uniformly accelerated motion variables? Acceleration, obviously. Velocity final, velocity initial, displacement, and change in time. There are four UAM equations. Now I know these four-Mr. P! Those are not the equations we're going to get on the equation sheet on the AP exam. Now I know these are not the UAM equations which are on the equation sheet which you're going to get on the AP exam. So I wanna make sure you understand the differences between what I've written here and what's going to be on that equation sheet. So, the first of the equations which I've written here is written as such on your equation sheet. Velocity in the x direction equals the velocity in the x direction naught, plus acceleration in the x direction times time. Billy, what does this naught, or this zero, as a subscript mean? Velocity naught, or velocity zero, means the velocity at time t equals zero or the initial velocity, correct? Correct. So, v sub x naught means the velocity initial in the x direction. I, instead, write v sub i for velocity initial, and I add subscripts whenever necessary. And there's also this difference between the change in time and time. Change in time equals time final minus time initial and using t for time final and letting time initial equal to zero, means that change in time equals t. But again, remember this assumes that the time initial is zero. Bobby, what about this v sub x, on the left hand side of the equation, what does that mean? That is the velocity final of the object in the x direction, right? Correct. So you can see, this first equation on the equation sheet describes the final velocity of an object as a function of time, assuming that the time initial is equal to zero. And here are the other two UAM equations on the equation sheet. These last two UAM equations have displacement, replaced with position final, or x, minus position initial, or x naught, and I don't know why my last UAM equation is not on the AP equation sheet.


Okay, class, using my UAM equations, how many UAM variables are there?  Five. And how many UAM equations?  Four. And if you know, how many of the UAM variables?  Three. You can find the other Two. Which leaves you with one Happy physics student. Which is always fun. And, I will point this out.


Velocity is the derivative of position with respect to time and if we use the UAM equation from your equation sheet of position as a function of time and we take the derivative of that with respect to time, we get the first of the UAM equations. (laughing) Which is pretty cool. Okay, let's move on to the concept of free fall. An object is in free fall if the only force acting on it is the force of gravity. In other words, there cannot be any air resistance. I like to call this being in the vacuum that you can breathe. When this occurs, the acceleration in the y direction equals the negative of the acceleration due to gravity or the negative of little g, and the acceleration due to gravity here on planet Earth is positive 9.81 meters per second squared. Which means, when an object is in free fall, the acceleration in the y direction of that object equals negative 9.81 meters per second squared, or 9.81 meters per second squared down. This means free fall is an example of uniformly accelerated motion where the acceleration is equal to a constant negative 9.81 meters per second squared. And you can use all the UAM equations. Bo, please, walk me through all the graphs for position, velocity, and acceleration as a function of time for an object that is in free fall dropped from a height of 2.0 meters. Is there any air resistance?  Unless it is otherwise stated in AP Physics, we are always in the vacuum you can breathe, so no air resistance. 


Okay. Let's start with the acceleration graph because that one is the easiest. We know the acceleration is a constant, it's constant at a value of negative 9.81 meters per second squared, so, acceleration as a function of time will be a horizontal line at negative 9.81 meters per second squared. The initial velocity of the ball is zero, and the slope of a velocity versus time graph is acceleration, so, the velocity versus time graph will be a line which starts at zero and has a constant slope of negative 9.81 meters per second squared. The position as a function of time graph will start at 2.0 meters, and because the slope of a position versus time graph is velocity, the initial slope of the position versus time graph will be zero. As time goes forward, the velocity becomes more and more negative, so the position as a function of time graph will have a negative slope which increases in magnitude over time. So it will be concave down until the position final is zero. Bo, thank you, that was very impressive.


Let's move on to component vectors. Component vectors are the vectors in the x, y, and possibly z directions, which when added together result in the original vector. Billy, please determine the component vectors of the acceleration vector, 2.5 meters per second squared at an angle of 26 degrees east of north. Well, the x direction uses cosine, so the acceleration in the x direction is 2.5 times the cosine of 26-No, it's not. You have to draw the vectors out and use SOH CAH TOA. Mr. P sets up his examples this way to make sure we show our work. Aw, yeah, so, once we draw the vectors, we can use sine theta equals opposite over hypotenuse, which equals acceleration in the x direction over acceleration, multiplied by acceleration, to get acceleration in the x direction, equals acceleration times sine theta or 2.5 times the sine of 26 degrees, which equals 1.09593, or, with two significant digits, 1.1 meter per second squared. We can do the same thing with cosine theta equals adjacent over hypotenuse, and we end up with the acceleration in the y direction equals acceleration times the cosine of theta, or with numbers, 2.24699, or with two significant digits, 2.2 meters per second squared. Which brings us to the unit vectors i, j, and k. Which are vectors with a magnitude of one in the x, y, and z directions, respectively. In other words, Bobby, what is, in unit vector form, an acceleration of 2.5 meters per second squared at an angle of 26 degrees east of north? Well, we just determined the components of that vector in the x and y directions, so the acceleration is 1.1i plus 2.2j meters per second squared.


What is that weird hat symbol over the i and j? That is the symbol for unit vector,
and yes it is often called a hat. Oh. So these two expressions describe the same acceleration. Plus, unit vectors make vector addition much easier. For example, let's say we are adding together three displacement vectors for an object. Without unit vectors, we would need to break every one of these vectors into its components, in the x direction and the y direction. Then we would need to add all the x values together, and then all the y values together, and then determine the magnitude and direction of the resultant vector. However, because all of these vectors are in unit vector form, all we need to do is add all the vectors in the x or i direction together and all the vectors in the y or j direction together. Which is a lot easier. And notice also, this gives us the r vector to identify the position of an object. Because it's not just the position in the x or y direction of an object, the r position vector can give you the position of the object in two or even three dimensional space.


Next, relative velocity. Relative velocity is vector addition. Let's say we need to fly a plane due north, relative to the Earth, in wind which is blowing eastward. What direction do we fly the plane? We know the velocity of the plane with respect to the Earth equals the velocity of the plane with respect to the wind plus the velocity of the wind with respect to the Earth, and we need to draw a tip to tail vector addition diagram. And you can see, the plane needs to be flown in a northwesterly direction. 


Let's move on to projectile motion, where an object is flying through the vacuum that you can breathe in both the x and y directions. Bo, what is our general strategy for solving projectile motion problems? We start by listing our known values, but we split them by direction, listing what we know in the x direction and what we know in the y direction separately because an object in projectile motion only experiences the force of gravity which is in the y direction. The object has no net force in the x direction and therefore no acceleration in the x direction. That means the velocity of the projectile in the x direction is constant and we can use velocity in the x direction equals displacement in the x direction over change in time. In the y direction the object experiences free fall so the acceleration in the y direction equals negative 9.81 meters per second squared and we can use the UAM equations. And the variable which connects the two directions is time, because time is the only variable which is a scalar. And we usually have to break the initial velocity into its components. 


That completes my review of kinematics. Next, you can enjoy my review of dynamics,which is Newton's three laws, forces, equilibrium, and so forth. Or you can visit my AP Physics C review web page. Thank you very much for learning with me today. I enjoyed learning with you.


[SMRY]
Dimensions are your friends!! Be careful with your conversions and give all your answers units (when they have them!)


Vector vs. Scalar: Vectors have both magnitude and direction. Scalars have magnitude only (no direction) but can be positive or negative.

Instantaneous velocity is the derivative of position as a function of time. Not to be confused with average velocity which is delta x over delta t. 


Instantaneous acceleration is the derivative of velocity as a function of time. Not to be confused with average acceleration which is change in velocity over change in time.        


The derivative represents the slope of the line.

The UAM equations: Velocity in the x direction equals the velocity in the x direction naught, plus acceleration in the x direction times time; X equals X naught v naugt x times t plus half acceleration times time squared; velocity final squared equals velocity naught squared plus 2 times acceleration times delta x. 

Free fall is when the only force acting on an object is the Force of Gravity. (No air resistance). This is Uniformly Accelerated Motion where you already know the acceleration! Component vectors are the vectors in the x, y (and possibly z) directions that make up a vector. Unit Vectors (i hat, j hat and k hat) are vectors with a value of 1 in the x, y, and z directions respectively. Vector addition is much easier using Unit Vectors.

R(vec) is generally used as the position vector symbol. This is so you can give the position of an object in 2 (or even 3) dimensions. 

Relative velocity is simply vector addition. The velocity of the plane with respect to the Earth equals the velocity of the plane with respect to the wind plus velocity of the wind with respect to the Earth. Don’t forget it’s tip-to-tail vector addition. 
Projectile Motion is when the only force acting on an object is the Force of Gravity and the object is moving in both the x and y directions. (No air resistance). Break the initial velocity into its components. Solve this using kinematic equations for x and y. Delta t (or t) is the same in both directions because it is a scalar and has magnitude only (no direction).

[TEXT]
Good morning. Today, we are going to continue our review of rotational dynamics, as part of the AP Physics C Mechanics curriculum.


Bo, you wanted to talk about this last time, so, here's your chance. What is the equation for torque which includes the cross product? Torque equals the cross product of F and r. Actually, Torque is the cross product of r and F. Does the order of r and F really matter? Well, yes, the cross product is not commutative. Of course it's not. And we should also point out that r is the position vector from the axis of rotation to where on the object the force is applied. And, remember, cross product is the area of the parallelogram created by those two vectors.


For torque, it is the area with the sides r and F that create the parallelogram. And the magnitude of the torque is r times F times the sine of the angle theta, which is the angle between the direction of r and the direction of the force. Now, let's do a basic example to review cross product with unit vectors. Vector A is negative I plus J minus 2K. Vector B is 2i minus 3j plus 4K.
Billy, please work out A cross B. Well, the cross product is the determinant of a matrix. This time, because we have three dimensions, X, Y and Z, we have a three-by-three matrix. So, the cross product is the determinant of the matrix where the first row is I J K, the second row is the components of A, or negative one, one, negative two, and the third row is the components of B, or two, negative three, four.


That is equal to the sum of the two-by-two determinants for each of the unit vectors, although we subtract the second determinant, the determinant that goes with J, in this case. So, cross out the row and column which has I in it, and you get the determinant one, negative two, negative three, four, times unit vector I. Cross out the row and column which has J in and subtract the determinants negative one, negative two, two, four, times unit vector J. Cross out the row and column which has K in it and add the determinant negative one, one, two, negative three,
times unit vector K.  Mr. P, can we skip this step? Bo, I don't normally write out the step with the two-by-two determinants in it. However, I think it's a good idea to have done this to see where the next step comes from. Billy? Now we multiply one by four and subtract the product of negative two and negative three, and multiply that quantity by by unit vector I, then we subtract the quantity negative one times four, minus the product of negative two and two, all that times unit vector J, and we add the product of negative one and negative three and subtract one times two, all times unit vector K.


That works out to be the quantity four minus six times I minus the quantity negative four plus four times J, plus the quantity three minus two times K, and, actually, all that we're left with is negative two I plus K. Thank you, Billy. Bobby, please tell me about translational equilibrium. Well, we just talked about this during our dynamics review. An object is in translational equilibrium if the net force acting on the object equals zero, and because net force equals mass times acceleration, that means the object is not accelerating. Very good.


And now, Bobby, please extend that to rotational equilibrium. Okay, then, an object is in rotational equilibrium when the net torque acting on the object equals zero. This means, because net torque equals moment of inertia times angular acceleration, that the object has no angular acceleration, so the object is either rotating with a constant angular velocity or is not rotating at all. Now, please remember, when you know an object is in translational equilibrium and rotational equilibrium about one axis of rotation, then you also know that object is also in rotational equilibrium about any other axis of rotation, which is why, for example, when we look at a person standing on a ladder, we can sum the forces in the X and Y directions and we can also sum the torques about multiple axis of rotation. Capital L stands for angular momentum, and angular momentum is a vector.


In order to understand how angular momentum is related to torque, we are going to start with Newton's Second Law. Net force equals mass times acceleration is the linear form, and net torque equals moment of inertia times angular acceleration is the rotational form. However, neither of those two use derivatives. Net force equals the derivative of linear momentum with respect for time is the linear form of Newton's Second Law. And net torque equals the derivative of angular momentum with respect to time is the rotational form of Newton's Second Law. Where, of course, torque and angular momentum are vectors. Bo, what is the equation for the angular momentum of a particle?


How can a particle have angular momentum? Any particle moving relative to an axis of rotation can have angular momentum. Yeah, that's right. It does not even have to be a particle, any object which is moving relative to an axis of rotation can have angular momentum. Bobby and Billy, you guys are correct. And, Bo, we'll do an example at the end which shows how a particle can have angular momentum. Billy, why don't you take this one. What is the equation for the angular momentum of a particle?


The angular momentum for a particle or a rigid object which is moving but not rotating equals the cross product of r and momentum, and r is similar to what it is in the torque equation. r is the position vector from the location of the center of mass of the moving object to the axis of rotation. Then, the angular momentum equals r cross mass times velocity, or r times mass times velocity times the sine of the angle between the directions of r and velocity? But, that is just the magnitude of the angular momentum. The cross product equation is a vector and includes direction. If we use that last equation, we have to use the right-hand rule to find the direction of torque, just like we did in our last review.
Right, Mr. P?  That is correct, Bobby.


And, Bobby, what is the equation for the angular momentum of a rigid object with shape which is rotating around an axis of rotation? A rigid object with shape has an angular momentum which equals the moment of inertia of that object times that object's angular velocity. And the units for angular momentum are kilograms times meters squared for moment of inertia, times radians per second for angular velocity. But radians are dimensionless, and just a placeholder. Therefore, the units for angular momentum are kilogram meters squared per second. The derivation of the conservation of linear momentum of a system is… If the net external force acting on the system equals zero, then the derivative of the momentum of the system with respect to time is equal to zero. That means the momentum of the system is not changing as a function of time, and that is conservation of linear momentum. We can do the same thing to derive conservation
of angular momentum.


If the net external torque acting on the system is equal to zero, then the derivative of the angular momentum of the system with respect for time is equal to zero. Therefore, the angular momentum of the system is not changing as a function of time. This is conservation of angular momentum. One importance difference to remember here is, that torque and angular momentum are relative to an axis of rotation. In other words, whenever you use conservation of angular momentum, you have to identify your axis of rotation.


Okay, let's now do an example problem which reviews conservation of angular momentum, because… We have to. Bobby, could you please read the problem? And Bo, could you please translate. A piece of gum with mass, m, and velocity, v, is spat at a solid cylinder of mass, M, radius, R, and moment of inertia 1/2 MR squared. The cylinder is on a horizontal axis through its center of mass and is initially at rest. Stop. Knowns for the gum are mass, little m, and velocity initial, little v. The knowns for the cylinder are mass, big M, radius, big R, moment of inertia, which is 1/2, big mass times big radius squared, and the cylinder has no initial angular velocity. Okay, so, I dislike using a lowercase m for the mass of one object and an uppercase M for the mass of a different object. I know the AP writers like to do that sometimes. However, to me, it just obfuscates what the masses really represent. So what I'm going to use is m sub g for the mass of the gum, v sub g i for the velocity of the gum initial, m sub c for the mass of the cylinder, and I'll just use capital R for the radius of the cylinder because it's the only object that has a radius. And I do suggest that you do this, you clarify your variables when you're solving an AP problem, so that you can help the AP graders understand what you're doing, which is always good.


Bobby? The line of action of the gum is located horizontally at height y above the axis of the cylinder. If the gum sticks to the cylinder, what is the final angular velocity of the gum-cylinder system? Angular velocity final, which will be the same for both the gum & the cylinder, equals question mark. However, I don't really know what to do with y. It's okay, Bo, it's actually a lot easier to describe using a drawing. Notice, because the gum sticks to the cylinder, that we know y must be less than the radius, capital R, of the cylinder.


Now, I know I said this was a conservation of angular momentum problem. However, can anyone explain to me how we know angular momentum is conserved in this example? Angular momentum is conserved in a system when the net external torque acting on the system equals zero. When the gum hits the cylinder, there's a force on the gum from the cylinder, which is directed radially outward. And because of Newton's Third Law, there is an equal but opposite force acting on the cylinder from the gum, which is directed radially inward. And if we sum the torques around the axis of rotation of the cylinder, the torques from both of those forces are zero, and therefore, the net external torque acting on a system equals zero, and angular momentum about the axis of rotation of the cylinder is conserved. Now, let's solve the problem. Billy, could you please? Absolutely. Conservation of angular momentum equals the initial
angular momentum of the gum, plus the initial angular momentum of the cylinder, and that equals the final angular momentum of the gum plus the final angular momentum of the cylinder. The gum is a particle, so we use the equation r for the gum initial times the mass of the gum times the velocity of the gum initial times the sine of theta for the gum initial. The cylinder is not rotating initially, so it has no initial angular momentum.


The gum is still a particle after the collision, so we use the same equation, only substitute in final
instead of initial. The cylinder is a rotating object with shape after the collision, so we use the moment of inertia of the cylinder times the final angular velocity of the cylinder. But, I don't really know what to do from here. This is where we need to find a relationship between r for the gum initial, theta for the gum initial, and this value y. The issue is that both the r for the gum initial and theta for the gum initial are changing as a function of time as the gum approaches the cylinder. The way we deal with this is we take the sine of theta for the gum initial, which equals opposite over hypotenuse. Opposite theta is this value y, and on the hypotenuse is r for the gum initial, and we can solve for y, it equals r for the gum initial times the sine of theta for the gum initial.


So, while r for the gum initial and theta for the gum initial both change as a function of position as that gum approaches the cylinder, the value y, which equals r for the gum initial times the sine of theta for the gum initial is a constant. y does not change as the gum approaches the cylinder. So, we replace r for the gum initial times the sine of theta for the gum initial with the value y. Just so you know, this concept of replacing r times sine theta with a constant value is pretty much guaranteed to come up on the AP exam. Bobby, what about the final values? The final equation for the gum is the same as the initial, only replacing initial with final, so it should work out to be the same thing, right? I don't think so. Before the collision, the gum was moving linearly, and after, it is moving in circular motion. So, the equation is not going to work out the same way. Okay, so, because the gum is moving in a circle, the r final for the gum is the radius of the cylinder, and the velocity final for the gum is a tangential velocity, which we know equals radius times angular velocity, so we can substitute the radius of the cylinder times the final angular velocity for the final velocity of the gum. And theta for the gum final will be 90 degrees,
because tangential velocity is always tangent to the radius, and the sine of 90 degrees is one. And we can substitute 1/2 times the mass of the cylinder times the radius of the cylinder squared for the moment of inertia of the cylinder. All we need to do now is factor out radius squared times angular velocity final, and then divide by everything on the right-hand side which is not angular velocity final, and we have the angular velocity final equals y times the mass of the gum times the velocity of the gum initial, all divided by the radius of the cylinder squared times the quantity, the mass of the gum plus the mass of the cylinder divided by two.


Now, when getting an answer like this which is all variables, which is often going to happen on the AP Physics C exam, it's good to just check your equation to make sure
it makes logical sense. For example, Billy, does it make logical sense that a larger velocity of the gum initial will result in a larger final angular velocity of the system? Yeah, it makes sense to me that a larger initial velocity of the gum would increase the final angular velocity of the system. How 'bout this? According to our answer, a larger mass of the cylinder will decrease the final angular velocity of the system. That also makes sense to me. And a larger radius of the cylinder should decrease the final angular velocity of the system. That's logical, I think I get it. That is a good exercise to go through whenever you get an answer that is all variables.


That brings us to the end of my review of rotational dynamics. Next, you can enjoy my linear versus rotational review, or you could visit my AP Physics C review webpage. Thank you very much for learning with me today, I enjoyed learning with you.


[SMRY]
Torque is the cross product (also called the vector product) of r and f. R is the position vector from the axis of rotation to the location of the force, F . Magnitude of torque is r times f times sine theta. Cross product is the area of the parallelogram with sides R and F. 

An object is in Translational Equilibrium if the net force acting on it equals zero, which means the object is not accelerating. An object is in Rotational Equilibrium if the net torque acting on it equals zero, which means the object is not angularly accelerating. This means the object is either not rotating or has a constant angular velocity. If an object is in translational equilibrium and in rotational equilibrium about one axis of rotation, then the object is in rotational equilibrium about any axis of rotation.

L is Angular Momentum and it is a vector! Just like torque, we have a cross product equation for angular momentum:  The angular momentum for a particle or a rigid object which is moving but not rotating equals the cross product of r and momentum. r is the position vector from the axis of rotation to the location of the center of mass of the moving object. And a magnitude equation for angular momentum: r times m times v sine theta. With this equation, we need to use the Right Hand Rule to find direction. A particle or a rigid object which is not rotating can have an angular momentum!

For a rigid object with shape: L equals impulse times angular velocity. Units for angular momentum: kilograms meters squared per second.