Manual Lecture Summary: CS 196, Introduction to Bash, Lecture 1The instructors for this class are Rohan Suresh and Sami Alqadi. The goals for today are to go over class logistics, go over what is Bash and what we will do with it, and understand Bash setup for different operating systems. Communication is through Piazza and Discord. Bash is a text only interface which can be used for controlling unix based operating system. Bash is a standardized way of interacting with the operating systems and its programs and standardization allows for easy automation/manipulation of many different tasks. There is virtually no setup for Linux or Mac, but for Windows one must install an Ubuntu Shell. Commands are unique statements that indicate specific tasks. Some commands need arguments which are further variables we provide to commands to execute a task. Flags are used to initialize commands behaviors. ls is used to list all files in the current directory, and the flag -a is used to list ALL files, including hidden ones. pwd is used to print the working directory. cd will let you change directory. Using cd and then starting the path with / will use an absolute path and cd .. will let you move up a directory. cat is used to display the contents of a file. touch is used to create a file in the current directory. rm is used to PERMANENTLY delete a file, and using the flag -rf with delete a file and its underlying components. BE CAREFUL WITH THIS. mkdir is used to create an empty directory. rmdir is used to delete an empty directory. mv is used to rename a file and/or move the file to a new location. cp will copy a file to a new location. man is used to bring up the manual for a command. Piping into files allows you to redirect output from the command line: > is used to redirect output, >> is used to append output to the file.Manual Lecture Summary: CS 196, Introduction to Bash, Lecture 2The objectives for today are to teach a few more commands in bash, go over logical operators, go over text editors, go through aliasing, and potentially (as a bonus) go through bash scripting. The sudo command is used to give the user root privileges, which are more or less administrator privileges. BE CAREFUL WITH THIS. sudo can delete important files. The echo command is used to print into Bash and is useful when determining errors within long commands. The find command is a powerful command used to locate files, and it can be used with the -name flag followed by a file to find the path to specific files and the -delete flag to delete found files. The grep command is used to search for text and return matching lines in a given file, using the -w flag will return exact matches, and using the -i flag will make the search case insensitive. The diff command is used to compare two files line by line and identify the lines where they differ. && is an and logical operator and lets you do commands sequentially. II is an or logical operator, and it will try the first command and if it fails, it will do the second. The ssh command is used to log into and do operations on a remote machine. There are many different text editors in Bash. vim is a terminal editor which opens in command mode with many keys. You can use -i to enter insert mode. In order to exit vim, you need to return back to command mode. Another text editor is known as emacs, which is similar to vim. The important keys are ctrl, the meta key, and esc which are combined with a variety of different keys. Another text editor is nano. Aliasing is a tool used to create bash shortcuts. Scripting is used within bash. You can run scripts by typing bash followed by script name dot sh. You can create a variable by declaring it and choosing a variable name. -eq is an equals operator for numerical comparisons and -ne is a not equals operator for numerical comparisons. “==” is an equals operator for Strings and “!=” is a not equals operator for Strings. Loops are useful. Functions are useful as well.Manual Lecture Summary: CS 196, Introduction to Python, Lecture 1The objectives for today are to get setup info, print hello world!, variables, conditionals, loops, functions, lists, and exception-handling. Python is a programming language. More specifically, it is an interpreted, object-oriented, high-level programming language with dynamic semantics. Python files have a .py extension. Object-oriented is a programming paradigm centered around the idea of using objects. Objects are abstract data types. Python is a high-level programming language. Pythonic code is a design choice to produce highly readable Python code. To create our first program, we create a .py file and run the script in bash with the command “python <file-name>.py>. Variables help us store stuff in programs. Dynamic typing in Python means that you don’t need to specify a variable type. None is a variable type used as an empty placeholder. Conditionals are an incredibly powerful way to let you make decisions in your code. The operators used are “==”, “!=”, “<=”, “>=”, “<”, “>”, “is”, and “in”. If we have more than two conditions, we use the elif statement. Loops allow us to repeatedly run the same section of code. The for loop uses the range function to establish how many times the loop will be run. The range function is inclusive at the start and exclusive at the end. The “in” operator can also be used in for loops. A list is not an array. The while loop says that while some statement is true, we run the code. To leave a loop early, we use the break keyword to break out of the current loop. Functions are blocks of code we plan on reusing. There is a specific format for functions. A function will return to the code that called it once it runs, and you can use the return keyword to manually leave a function. Lists are a collection which is ordered and changeable. Lists are simply arrays of bytes. When an error occurs in our program, Python will stop and send an error message. In order to handle these, we use exception handling with the try-except commands.Manual Lecture Summary: CS 196, Introduction to Python, Lecture 2 (issues here with how to summarize examples – might have to specify that)The objectives for today are to understand the review, Pythonic code, list comprehension, enumerate, sets, and dictionaries. The review covers variables, conditionals, loops, functions, and lists. Pythonic code is code that uses Python in the way it was intended to be used. Common commands and code in other languages can be condensed and made more effective in Python. Pythonic code can be used to find if something exists in an array, to find the sum of a list of numbers, etc. more effectively. Also, slicing is a useful piece of Pythonic code. List comprehensions are a classic Pythonic tool which allows you to create new lists from other lists. List comprehensions have an output expression, variable, input sequence, and an optional predicate. We can supercharge list comprehension with conditional logic. Another Pythonic tool is called enumerate which allows us to assign an index to values in a list. Enumerate is useful with loops. Now we will learn about data structures. Sets are unordered and unindexed data structures, with each value being unique. Sets are very fast when used as lookup tables. Sets have a function in ‘Math’ sets. To initialize a set, you say your variable is equal to set(). You use the .add() with the value you want to add. Sets have faster lookup times than arrays or lists. Dictionaries are another data structure. We can access elements by referencing keys. They use key-value pairs. These are very fast when used as a lookup table. Manual Lecture Summary: American Pageant Chapter 1, JoczProductionsPeople came to the Americas via the Bering Strait ice bridge. Native American societal structure is built upon interactions with each other and the environment. Natives practiced animism, which is the belief that non-human things possess a spiritual essence. Natives developed societies that transformed and adapted to their diverse environments. Some examples include the Pueblo, Lakota Sioux, and Iroquois. The colonization of the New World centered around the 3 Gs: gold, glory, and god. The arrival of Columbus led to massive demographic and social changes. The Columbian exchange caused the trans-atlantic exchange of people, diseases, food, trade, ideas, etc between the Western Hemisphere, Africa, and Europe. Horses, disease, and corn were all exchanged. The Treaty of Tordesillas made Spain and Portugal divide up the Western Hemisphere. The Encomienda System said Spanish colonists received land with native people. They used native slave labor in mining or agriculture. Spanish people sought to convert Native people to Catholicism. Mestizos are people of mixed Indian and European heritage. Mulattos are people of mixed white and black ancestry. Pope’s Rebellion in 1680 led to the death of hundreds of Spanish colonists and the destruction of Catholic churches in the area. Debates occurred over how Native Americans should be treated. Juan de Sepulvida wrote “Just Causes for War Against the Indians” that justified Spanish colonization of the Americas. Bartolome de las Casas published in 1552 “A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies” that criticized Spanish treatment of indigenous people. Protestant England will soon challenge Spanish colonization of North America. The Spanish, French, and Dutch are going to attempt to exploit new world resources AND form more complex relationships with indigenous people. A reason for colonization is mercantilism, which is when colonies exist to enrich the Mother country. These countries have access to raw materials and provide gold and silver. Manual Lecture Summary: American Pageant Chapter 2, Jocz ProductionsEngland defeats the Spanish Armada in 1588. England was a Protestant country, and it had different types of colonies. A joint stock company is where stockholders invest in a company and share in the potential profits or losses from the colony. A proprietorship is land given by the king to an individual or group. A royal colony is paid for and ruled directly by the monarchy. The colony of Roanoke fails in 1587. The Chesapeake colonies were Virginia and Maryland. The first permanent English Colony in North America was established at Jamestown in 1607 for wealth under the joint stock company the Virginia Company. Many of the original settlers died of disease and starvation. John Smith established military discipline and saved the colony. John Rolfe introduced tobacco. In colonial Virginia, tobacco provided the colony with a cash crop and led to the rise of the plantation system. They needed a cheap labor supply, so indentured servants served as the early labor force of Virginia, meaning they worked for a period of time in exchange for passage to the colony. The headright system said that you get land if you paid for somebody’s journey to the colony. The House of Burgessess was established in 1619 and was a form of early representative government. Problems began to develop, as tobacco destroyed land, demand for labor and land goes up, tensions increase with natives as colonists move west. A very hostile relationship developed between the colonists and the Powhatan tribe. Tensions increased as settlers moved west. The Anglo-Powhatan Wars happened between 1610-1646. The first war ends in 1614 between Pocahontas and John Rolfe. The Massacre of 1622 begins the 2nd war. By 1624, Jamestown becomes a royal colony. The Powhatan Confederacy was largely defeated by 1646 because of disease, disorganization, and disposability. The first Africans arrive in the colony in 1619. Bacon’s Rebellion occurred in 1676. This was due to a lack of land, lack of political power, and a lack of action on Native American attacks. Nathaniel Bacon leads a rebellion against Indians on the frontier and burned Jamestown. This leads to a transition to African Chattel Slave Labor, which demonstrates tension in colonial society between social classes and regions. Another Chesapeake colony was Maryland which was a proprietorship led by Lord Baltimore. The Act of Toleration of 1649 guaranteed religious freedom for all Christians. There were multiple Southern colonies. South Carolina was a cash crop plantation economy with wealthy aristocratic elite and African slave labor. North Carolina had small tobacco farmers and less of a reliance on slavery. Georgia served as a buffer colony against Spanish and French threat.Manual Lecture Summary: American Pageant Chapter 3, Jocz ProductionsNew England colonies had religious motives for colonization, male and female settlers, tight knit communities, and a mixed economy. The Protestant Reformation sparked dramatic changes in Europe and led to the ride of Puritanism. Puritans wanted to purify the church. The pilgrims were separatists who wanted to break away from the Anglican Church. The pilgrims sought to establish a colony and land at Plymouth. The Mayflower Compact established a basic government upon majority rule, and it established the basis of self government. The Governor was William Bradford. In 1629, Puritan John Winthrop received a charter to establish the Massachusetts Bay colony. His goal was to be a “City Upon a Hill”. Religion was extremely important in the New England colonies. Religious freedom was reserved only for Puritans. Church membership was a requirement for participation in politics, Town Hall Meeting became an important part of direct democracy in colonial America, as all church going males could participate. Roger Williams questioned Puritan leadership. He called for the complete separation of church and state and criticized the colonies treatment of Native Americans. He was banished from the colony and founded Providence, Rhode Island. This was the first colony with complete religious freedom. Anne Hutchison challenged the accepted role of women within the church by openly speaking out against church leaders. The Pequot War caused New England colonists to wipe out the Pequot tribe. The New England Confederation in 1643 was a military alliance intended to defend the New England colonies against potential threats. King Philip’s War happened between 1675 and 1676 and was when the leader of the Wampanoags were defeated by the colonists. This was the end of major Native resistance to the New England colonies. The Middle Colonies were the breadbasket of America. New York was originally a Dutch colony called New Amsterdam. Charles the Second sends a military expedition and grants area to his brother James the Duke of York. Pennsylvania was founded by William Penn as a refuge for Quakers. It was a very liberal colony. It treated Native Americans fairly. It practiced religious toleration and freedom. It extended rights to women. It was demographically, religiously, and ethnically diverse. Mercantilism meant that colonies were designed to enrich the mother country. The Navigation Acts established that 1. Trade carried only in English or colonial ships 2. Trade had to pass through English ports 3. Certain enumerated goods from the colonies could be exported only to England (tobacco, etc.). Smuggling was a problem. The Dominion of New England of 1686 implemented to increase royal control over the colonies. Sir Edmund Andros was appointed by the king. He was very unpopular as he enforced the Navigation Acts and limited town meetings.Manual Lecture Summary: American Pageant Chapter 4-5, Jocz ProductionsIn the New England colonies, there were Puritan religious motives for colonization. These were close-knit homogeneous society. There was an importance of religion, family, and education, as schools were required. There were Town Hall meetings. They received a large number of immigrants and a high birthrate. There was a mixed economy based on agriculture, trade, and shipbuilding. In the Southern Plantation colonies, it was male dominated society, had a warmer climate, had a harsh life, and had a lower birth rate. There was a defined hierarchy of wealth and status. These were cash crop plantation economies. Very few cities developed. The labor system moved from indentured servants to slavery. There was a transition to slavery because of an abundance of land, a shortage of indentured servants, no way to enslave the native population, and a European demand for colonial goods. The triangular trade was a 3 part trade route where slaves and goods moved from Africa, the Carribbean, and the colonies. The journey from Africa to the Western Hemisphere was known as the “Middle passage”. Slave culture was a blend of African and American cultures based on a variety of tribes from different parts of Africa. The Stono Uprising in 1739 South Carolina was one of the few slave revolts in colonial America. They tried to get to Spanish Florida where they were promised freedom. The rebellion was defeated and contributed to stricter laws regulating slaves. Religious passion was fading in the New England colonies. The Half Way Covenant in 1662 said that individuals could become partial church members even if they did not have a conversion. The Massachussetts Bay colony did not allow freedom of religion. Some religious toleration existed in a few British colonies, as Pennsylvania had Quakers, Rhode Island had separation of church and state, and Maryland had toleration for all Christians. The Great Awakening was a religious revival in the 1730s-1740s that spread throughout the colonies. Many people convert. Jonathan Edwards delivered the speech “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God”. George Whitefield introduced a new energized style of evangelical preaching. This saw the New Lights, who were supporters, versus Old Lights, who were against it. This led to the new universities being formed such as Dartmouth, Princeton, Brown, and more. Greater religious independence and diversity resulted, and new churches formed. This strengthened calls for the separation of church and state. This was the first mass movement shared amongst colonists. Various mercantile laws were passed to regulate colonial trade and to benefit England such as the Navigation Acts and the Molasses Act. The goals and interests of European leaders at times diverged from those of colonial citizens. Salutary neglect was defined as relative indifference to colonial governance. The good was that colonial shipbuilding developed. This provided protection of the British military. This provided Chesapeake tobacco a monopoly in England. The bad was that it restricted the development of colonial manufacturing. England attempted to integrate the colonies into a coherent, hierarchical imperial structure known as the Dominion of New England in 1686. The Glorious Revolution in 1688 led to the overthrow of James II and William and Mary take the throne. This limits the power of the monarchy. The colonists rebel against the Dominion of England. The big turning point was the end of the seven years war. Colonial politics saw the gradual development of democratic institutions in the colonies such as the Mayflower Compact and Town Hall Meetings. Many people were still excluded and England was ultimately still in charge. The Zenger Case of 1733 advanced the freedom of the press.Manual Lecture Summary: American Pageant Chapter 14, Jocz ProductionsThe Market Revolution saw regional specialization which caused sections developing distinct economies. The North became known for the Industrial Revolution, the West became known for agriculture, and the South became known for a cash crop economy. There were technology and transportation improvements. The population increased because of a high birthrate. Also, there was much immigration from the Irish, German, and the English. There was a growth of cities such as New York, Chicago, and New Orleans. There was western expansion which raises the issue of slavery again. Economic changes had an impact on migration patterns, gender and family relations, and class relations. There was a spike in immigration due to lots of land, jobs in factories, American freedom and opportunity, and the Irish potato famine. Irish Immigrants largely settled in cities. They oftentimes did hard labor for low wages. They were victims of prejudice, as they received the anger of native born Americans over stealing jobs since they worked for low wages. Many were Catholic and victims of anti-Catholicism. They were important politically due to their support for Democrats, displayed by the political machine Tammany Hall in New York. German immigrants were an extremely diverse group with a mix or religions and a wide variety of social classes and occupations. They settled in the Old Northwest and established German communities. This caused the rise of Nativist groups in America. They said that immigrants took jobs from native Americans, would outvote the native Americans and ruin American culture, and were Roman Catholic. The Know Nothing Party was a group of American nativists that advocated for restrictions on immigrants. America was becoming more ethnically and racially diverse. Regional political and economic loyalties often continued to overshadow national concerns. Northern manufacturing is key during the Market Revolution. Samuel Slater in the 1790s was called the Father of the factory system. He memorized plans for machinery from England. Eli Whitney’s interchangeable parts allowed for mass production in factories which caused greater efficiency. Samuel Morse invented the telegraph in 1844 which causes a revolution in communication. There was a change in factory work in the North. Manufacturing was done in factories for long hours, low wages, and in dangerous conditions. Life went from semi subsistence agriculture to wage slaves. The Lowell System was a factor in New England worked by famers daughters. The Supreme Court case Commonwealth vs. Hunt legalized labor unions. There was no major labor movement until later. This later caused a Northern economic advantage in the Civil War. The Transportation Revolution saw the Steamboat Clermont developed in 1807 by Robert Fulton, which makes transportation costs cheaper. Turnpikes were built, and Cumberland Road was built in 1811. The Erie Canal in 1825 was built by New York state which linked the Great Lakes with the Hudson river. There was a canal boom in between the 1820s and 1830s. Railroads were fast, more reliable, and cheaper than canals, which caused an explosion of construction, especially in the North. This meant that the Continental economy emerged by 1860. In farming in 1830, Cyrus McCormick invented the McCormick reaper, which could cut and gather more crops. John Deere invents the snow plow in 1837, which broke through soil. This caused a shift from subsistence farming to large scale farming. This caused a demand for more land and machinery, and this increases debt amongst farmers. Additionally, this causes a need for better transportation. Eli Whitney’s cotton gin created a huge demand for slaves, and Northern factories purchases this cotton.Manual Lecture Summary: American Pageant Chapter 17, Jocz ProductionsIn the election of 1840, the Whigs chose William Henry Harrison as a President and John Tyler as Vice President. Tyler still holds many Democrat beliefs, and he starts to block goals of the Whig party, led by Henry Clay and Daniel Webster. He attempts to annex Texas, but he is defeated by Congress. In the Election of 1844, James K. Polk wins. During the lame duck period, John Tyler submitted a proposal and Congress annexed Texas. This was accomplished by a joint resolution, as it only needed a majority of both houses. It does not need a 2/3 approval by the Senate. The goals of James K. Polk were to lower the tariff, exploit national expansion and use manifest destiny, expand into Oregon, annex Texas, and acquire California. Manifest Destiny was the belief that it was America’s destiny to conquer and civilize the entire continent. It was built upon the belief of white superiority. The term was coined by John O’Sullivan in 1845. Western expansion had been going on for some time, as displayed by the Lousiana Purchase in 1803, the Missouri Compromise in 1820, and Jackson’s Indian Removal policies in the 1830s. The issue of slavery complicates the issue of western expansion. The Oregon Dispute, known as the 54’ 40 or Fight!, was rooted in the Anglo-American Convention of 1818, where the U.S. and England agreed to peacefully jointly occupy the Oregon Territory. The Oregon Trail saw many American settlers flood into the area. There was a major issue in the Election of 1844. The Oregon Treaty in 1846 did not cause war. Mexico still viewed Texas as part of Mexico. This caused a dispute over the river Rio Grande and Nueces river. Polk attempts to buy California from Mexico. The Slidell Mission was when Mexico refuses offer of 25 million dollars for California. Polk sends Zachary Taylor into disputed territory between Mexico and Texas. U.S. forces attacked in April 1846. The Northern Whigs oppose the war, as they see it as an attempt by Southerners to extend slavery. Lincoln introduces the “Spot Resolution”, demanding to know if attack really took place on U.S. soil. The Wilmot Proviso attempted to ban slavery in any territory acquired from Mexico. This was passed by the House but rejected by the Senate. In the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo in 1848, Mexico gave up claims to Texas and accepts Rio Grande border. Mexico gave the U.S., California, New Mexico, and the rest of the Southwest. This increases U.S. territory by 1/3. Mexico lost about half its territory. This strains relations between the U.S. and Mexico.