[TEXT]
In the last section, we examined some early aspects of memory. In this section, what we’re going to do is discuss some factors that influence memory. So let’s do that by beginning with the concept on slide two, and that concept is overlearning. Basically in overlearning, the idea is that you continue to study something after you can recall it perfectly. So you study some particular topic whatever that topic is. When you can recall it perfectly, you continue to study it.
This is a classic way to help when one is taking comprehensive finals later in the semester. So when you study for exam one and after you really know it all, you continue to study it. That will make your comprehensive final easier.
The next factor that will influence memory relates to what we call organization. In general, if you can organize material, you can recall it better. There are lots of different types of organizational strategies and I’ve listed those on slide four. So let’s begin by talking about the first organizational strategy called clustering and is located on page five.
In clustering, basically you recall items better if you can recognize that there are two or more types of things in a particular list. So let’s give a couple of lists and show you some examples of that. These examples are shown in slide six.
Let’s say that I give you the first list; north, cardinal, south, robin, east, wren, west, sparrow. Now if you can recognize that north, south, east and west are points on a compass and cardinal, robin, wren and sparrow are birds, then you have a higher probability of recalling that material than if you just tried to recall the list in order.
The same occurs with the second list that is located on the right hand side of page six. So let’s list these words as well; pig, cat, horse, dog, sheep, birds, cow, and fish. Now if you can recognize that these are two groups of animals; one being farm animals and the other being domestic companions, ala, pets, then you can recall that list of material better than if you just tried to recall the list in order. So again, this is another type of example of organizational strategy.
Now there are other organizational strategies that one can use as well. The next one of these, as we see on slide seven, are what are called verbal pneumonic techniques. In verbal pneumonic techniques, you make your own organization and there are many, many different types of techniques. So let’s talk about the first of these on slide eight and that is called acrostics. In acrostics these are phrases in which the first letter of each word functions as a cue to help you recall some piece of information. There are a variety of different acrostics that one uses. The most famous of these relates to this saying: On Old Olympus Towering Tops A Fin And German Vented Some Hops. These relate to the twelve different cranial nerves that we have within the brain and if you are a traditional medical student or taking anatomy and physiology, this is the acrostic that you usually use to remember them.
Now there are other verbal pneumonic techniques as well. 

[TEXT]
So let’s take a look at another one of those and is located in slide 10. These are called acronyms. Acronyms are basically a word formed out of the first letters of a series of words. A classic example of an acronym system is ROY G BIV which are the first letters of the colors in the visual spectrum. This is the classic acronym that all sensation and perception students and even introductory psych students learn to memorize. Another verbal pneumonic technique is shown on slide 11 and called Rhymes. The classic rhyme is one that you had learned in grade school is I before E except after C. So rhymes are another way to recall and memorize information.
So now we’ve examined a variety of different verbal pneumonic techniques and how they work. In this next section, we’re going to examine some visual imagery types of methods to organize material.
The first of these is shown in slide 13 and is called the Method of Loci. Basically it involves taking some kind of an imaginary walk along some familiar path where images that you’re trying to recall are associated with some items or locations along the path. The classic example of where we put material is in your house. So just close your eyes and think about this. What happens when you walk in your back door? What’s the first item that you see. Well the first item that you see is where you put the first piece of information that you want to remember. Let’s say that it is a coat hook, so you hang something on the coat hook. Then you continue on into the kitchen. In the kitchen, what’s the first thing that you see? Well it may be the refrigerator, and so you identify the second item that you’re trying to remember and put it on the refrigerator. Then you open the door in the refrigerator and that’s where you put your third item. And then you close the refrigerator door and you look to your left and there’s the stove. So, you put the next item on one of the burners of the stove and on and on until you have all the items that you are trying to remember located within the kitchen or within the house.
Then when you’re trying to recall the items during the exam, you begin your walk around the house. So the first thing you think about is what happens when I walk in the back door and lo and behold, there’s the first item I’m trying to recall. Then I go to the refrigerator and there’s the second item. Then I open the door of the refrigerator and there’s the third item and on and on until I have all the different materials that I’m trying to remember put down for my exam.
Now walking around the house is a good place to use the method of loci, but there are other places that’s even better. 

[TEXT]
The better place to try and place all the information you want to learn is in the location where you’re going to have to recall the material. So sitting in the exam room where you’re going to take the test and putting all those things on different objects within the exam room is a good strategy. Especially if one is trying to memorize lots and lots of different information because each of those places acts as a cue.
So that’s the first type of visual imagery technique. Now the second type of visual imagery technique is shown on slide 14. This is called the pegword technique. The pegword technique relies on a list of integers. What you do is attach a pegword to each of the numbers with rhymes. The classic example is One rhyming with Bun, Two and Shoe, Three and Tree, Four and Door and on and on. Then as we see in slide 15, when you’re given a list of words to recall, you associate the first word in the list with the peg word. For example you have a word, let’s say you’re trying to recall the word “Bee” and the peg word is bun. Well what you might try to do is visualize a bee eating a great big bun. As a result of that, you make associations. Furthermore, the more outrageous the association, the better the recall is for the particular item. So, let’s say that you might have a frog with shoes on, and a horse knocking down a tree, or whatever it may be to the information that you’re trying to recall.
So these are the first two techniques (overlearning, organization) that relate to factors that influence memory. What’s the next major factor? Well, the next major factor is shown on slides 16 and 17 and that is the order in which you learn things. If I give you a list of words in a serial learning task or a free recall task, you have better recall for words at the beginning and end of a list but not in the middle of a particular list. That is called the Serial Position Effect. There’s a couple different things you need to note about the serial position effect. First recall at the beginning of the list is what is called the Primacy Effect and recall for the end of the list is called the Recency Effect. The recency effect occurs because you can generally only recall seven plus or minus two items in working or what is also called short term memory. We’ll talk about that in more detail a little bit later.
Now the serial position effect is shown in the graphical figure on slide 19. As we can see when we start to memorize a list of words, we usually start about 60 to 65% accuracy. In the recency phase, at the last word that we’re trying to recall we have a percent recall rate of about 85 to 90% depending on the study. Note within the middle of the list that you’re trying to look at you only have about a 20% chance of recalling a particular set of items.
So the serial recall effect is extremely important for how you try to memorize things. 

[TEXT]
For example, if you were studying three chapters for learning, as what we might have here, and you always start with the first chapter in order (so you start with chapter one, then two, then three), you will have fairly good recall for chapter one, you’ll have some decent recall also for chapter three but chapter two you won’t remember at all. So a better way to memorize that material is to change the order in which you’re learning the material. So you start one day with chapters one, two, and three in that order, then you go with two, three, and one; and finally, three, one and two, and on and on. What this does is help you raise the level of the middle section within the recency of effect. So, within the serial learning effect, what you should do is vary the order so you have good recall of information.
Now there’s another variable that goes along with the serial position effect and is shown on slide 20. It is called the Von Resterhoff Effect. Basically when a word is in the middle of a list that is surprising or funny or dirty, you will usually recall that particular word and some of those around it. So let’s give an example of that in the following slide.
Look on slide 21 at the list of words. What I’d like you to do is try to recall the words in order. So, take a minute to do that.
Now that you have memorized and tried to recall the words, look in the middle of the list. Basically what happens is that everybody will recall the word “intercourse” and usually a couple of words around it. So you might recall elephant and even suitcase. This effect is shown on slide 22. So, we have the same kind of effect that we saw with the serial learning task we began with on earlier slides. But we also see that in the middle of the list, we recall one or two particular words, then we drop off again before we have a recency effect (starting toward words 14 and 15). So again, the Von Resterhoff effect is an extremely important effect. You can use it to your advantage by putting surprising or interesting things in the middle of the list of material that you’re trying to memorize.
Now the next factor that influences learning and memory is what we call proactive interference or what is also called proactive inhibition. Here is where your past learning will interfere with your ability to recall new material. Let’s give an example, if you learn list A, then you learn list B, and finally you have to recall B. In proactive interference, list A will interfere with your ability to recall list B. A classic example is shown on slide 24. You learn sociology then you learn psychology. Sociology will interfere with your ability to recall the psychology. To help keep it clear we have a little organizational scheme that kind of helps us. That is a classic acronym PABB. Proactive - You learn A, you learn B, then you recall B.
Now sometimes your past learning will interfere with information retention or sometimes your past learning will help you because you learn to organize it better. We will talk about this in more detail in the next section.

[TEXT]
The next factor that influences memory is shown on slide 26 and that is what is called retroactive interference or retroactive inhibition. Unlike proactive interference, learning new material interferes with your ability to recall old material. That is, you learn list C, then you learn list D, then you have to recall C. Consequently, D will interfere with your ability to recall C.
So let’s take an example of that. Here you learn psychology, then you learn sociology, and sociology will interfere with your ability to recall the psychology. So let’s take another example and use a more practical example. Let’s say that you’re learning psychology, (ala learning) and you’re going to take a test. You walk into the exam and you have about five minutes before the exam starts. So you take out a newspaper such as the Argonaut, which is our school newspaper and you start to read it. Consequently, the Argonaut will interfere with your ability to recall the psychology. Again we have another acronym and that is RCDC. Retroactive - you learn C, you learn D, then you have to recall the C.
What are important things for you about proactive and retroactive interference from an applied standpoint. This is shown in slide 29. First of all, don’t take similar courses in the same semester. Take things that are different and that don’t have a lot of overlap. As a result you will recall all of them better. An example might be taking some sociology, some math, biology and computer science rather than taking sociology, psychology, anthropology, and maybe political science. If you do, things just get jumbled together.
Now the next variable that’s going to influence learning is what is called active participation. In general, the more active you are during the learning cycle, the more you will recall, This is shown in slide 31. Quizzing yourself while you’re reading, determining how the material that you’re currently working with relates to other material, using study guides, outlining the chapters or notes, etc., will significantly increase your recall of information.
The major one these relates to highlighting and chapter outlining or reading. If you look at and see which gives you the better recall, there is no doubt about it that outlining your book chapter will give you better recall than highlighting or reading the book. Let’s just take the concept of highlighting. What are you doing when you highlight a piece of text, let’s say a paragraph or two. What are you doing when you’re doing that? Essentially, what you’re trying to do is keep the yellow or pink line going over the text. You are not really using the information or putting it into your brain system. Whereas if you are outlining some book chapter or some notes, what are you having to do. First, you have to read it, then you have to put it into some kind of verbal vocabulary. Once you have the verbal vocabulary, you have to write it on paper and make sure that it makes sense as you’re doing that. So, when you outline a chapter, you’re putting information into your brain four or five different ways, rather than putting it in and using one or two ways, such as with highlighting or even reading.

[TEXT]
Now the next variable that will impact learning is the similarity of the learning and recall condition. In general, the more similar the recall condition is to the learning condition, the better the recall. This is a classic example that is shown in slide 33. The ideal place to study for an exam is where, the room where you’re going to take the exam. Here you have all the cues. And the more similar it is, (everybody studying in the same room) the more information you recall.
Now there’s a related concept that goes with the similarity of learning and recall condition and this is shown in slide 35. It is called state dependent learning. What state dependent learning basically says is this. “It’s best to recall information in the same drug state as you are when you’re doing the learning.” So, as we see on slide 36, if you smoke, you need to smoke while taking your exam. If you drink coffee or coke while you’re studying, you need to drink coffee or coke while taking the exam.
When I was in grad school many, many years ago, I drank a lot of Coca Cola, but I knew exactly how my body felt when I was taking the exam and when I was drinking the Coke while studying. If my Coca Cola level was off, I did poorer on the exam.
Now a related variable is if you don’t study while drinking coffee, but take the exam on coffee, what happens? Well what happens is that you don’t recall as well (and the same is true with smoking). Since people aren’t allowed to smoke in auditoriums or wherever they are taking exams, it’s best not to smoke when you’re studying.
Now this concept relates to a concept that is called test anxiety and in test anxiety, what you’re doing is something very similar, and this is shown in slide 37. In test anxiety, basically while you’re studying you tend to be relaxed, but when you’re taking the exam, you tend to get tense due to the stress of the exam. When you’re tense, what happens? Your blood pressure goes up, different hormones are released, etc. As a result, your mind goes “poof” and everything’s gone. Then what happens when you get done with the exam. You walk out, you begin to relax, and guess what happens, you can recall the information again.
So, the best way to help yourself is to learn to stay relaxed while you’re taking your exam. If you have problems doing that, participate in a test anxiety workshop. There are a variety of those located at a variety of different settings. Furthermore, any good clinical or counseling psychologist can help you with that.
Now the next variable that relates to factors that influence learning and memory relates to spaced practice being better than massed practice (or what is called cramming). 

[TEXT]
This is shown on slide 39. In general, it’s better to spread out studying over a period of time instead of doing it all at once. Let’s give an example of that on slide 40. Basically studying three days for one hour is better than studying three hours all at once. That is, don’t cram for the exam. The question then becomes why? As we show in slide 41, the reason you have problems is because of the serial position curve. Generally you can only recall seven plus or minus two items in your memory, so when you’re cramming, basically what you’re doing is putting in information into your short term memory. Thus what you have is recalling of recency effect items.
So in SUMM as we see here in the last few minutes is that there’s a variety of different factors that influence memory. Each of these factors is extremely important and ones that you should remember. In the next section, we’re going to begin to examine some early theories of memory and how those theories work.

[SUMM]
The next factor that will influence memory relates to what we call organization.
In clustering, basically you recall items better if you can recognize that there are two or more types of things in a particular list.
Now there are other verbal pneumonic techniques as well.
The same occurs with the second list that is located on the right hand side of page six.
You learn sociology then you learn psychology.
In this section, what we’re going to do is discuss some factors that influence memory.
Let’s say that I give you the first list; north, cardinal, south, robin, east, wren, west, sparrow.
There are lots of different types of organizational strategies and I’ve listed those on slide four.
This is a classic way to help when one is taking comprehensive finals later in the semester.
So let’s begin by talking about the first organizational strategy called clustering and is located on page five.
Thus what you have is recalling of recency effect items.
In verbal pneumonic techniques, you make your own organization and there are many, many different types of techniques.
Proactive - You learn A, you learn B, then you recall B.
These examples are shown in slide six.
In general, if you can organize material, you can recall it better.
So when you study for exam one and after you really know it all, you continue to study it.
When you can recall it perfectly, you continue to study it.
That is called the Serial Position Effect.
So you study some particular topic whatever that topic is.
The next one of these, as we see on slide seven, are what are called verbal pneumonic techniques.
So let’s do that by beginning with the concept on slide two, and that concept is overlearning.
If you have problems doing that, participate in a test anxiety workshop.
Let’s say that you’re learning psychology, (ala learning) and you’re going to take a test.
So now we’ve examined a variety of different verbal pneumonic techniques and how they work.
Another verbal pneumonic technique is shown on slide 11 and called Rhymes.
There are a variety of different acrostics that one uses.
Basically in overlearning, the idea is that you continue to study something after you can recall it perfectly.
Now if you can recognize that north, south, east and west are points on a compass and cardinal, robin, wren and sparrow are birds, then you have a higher probability of recalling that material than if you just tried to recall the list in order.
Let’s give an example, if you learn list A, then you learn list B, and finally you have to recall B.
That is a classic acronym PABB.
[SEP]

[TEXT]
In the last section we were talking about some early models of memory and primarily the Atkinson and Shiffrin model. In this section we examine a variety of different brain structures that are involved with memory. So let’s talk about a few of these and get an idea about where they are and what they do.
The first major structure that’s involved with memory is what is called the Hippocampus, and the Hippocampus plays a major role in encoding and storing information. When you damage the Hippocampus, you have problems with storing and recall. Tenerally the information is not appropriately coded due to insufficient types of elaboration. Thus, when you damage your Hippocampus (by a stroke or trauma) new information is not stored. However, your old information remains intact. This is called anterograde amnesia and often occurs with individuals who experience a stroke. They’ve damaged their Hippocampus and can’t remember new stuff but their old information still there. So, when they’re out wandering around after getting out of the hospital or they’re moved to a new facility. What happens when they get out on the street and they’re driving around? Where do they go? Well, they go back to their old place where they used to live.
Now the second type of structure that’s involved with memory is shown on slide three and is called the Thalamus. The thalamus is also involved with memory formation. This structure is thought to initially give the message to print the message that you’re trying to remember. With damage, you never get memory traces. They’re never created. So the memory that you have is in neither in short term memory or long term memory. Basically; it never even gets there.
So, as we see in slide four, when you damage the Hippocampus, the memories form but due to elaboration problems, it’s not properly encoded and so it goes away. But with damage to the thalamus, the memory never gets formed at all.
The next major structure that we want to talk about with memory is called the Cerebellum. The cerebellum is extremely important for different types of physical memories and procedural memories. The classic study that shows this done by Thompson. What Thompson did was he conditioned an eye blink response and a leg movement response. He then lesioned the area that disrupted the eye blink response. As a resultt, the leg response was unaffected. But then he moved to the system of one millimeter closer to the middle of the brain and then lesions. As a result, he found that the leg response was affected but the eye blink response was not.
Thus what you seem to have, says Thompson (and others as well), are specific systems and specific locations where you store different types of memories that are associated with physical pathways. So, as we see on slide six, we have isolated procedural memories that have unique pathways in the cerebellum. You also get the same kind of response when you remove the Hippocampus and other structures.

[TEXT]
The next structure that’s highly involved with memory, is your cortex and it has lots of different locations that are related to memory. Where the memory is stored tends to be related to the type of memory that’s involved. For example, movement memories and things like that tend to be involved with the precentral gyrus in the frontal lobe of the brain. Whereas sensory memory items tend to be involved with the postcentral gyrus located in the parietal lobe of the brain. But mostly when we talk about memories for knowledge and other things, we talk about structures within the frontal lobe, and association cortex within the frontal and temporal lobes. So again, memory is located in lots of different places within your cortex. It depends upon the type of memory that you are trying to memorize.
Now the last slide that we see here (slide eight), kind of puts this all together. So let’s walk through the slide so we get an idea about the different structures that are involved with each aspect of memory. This is the same figure that we saw earlier in the last section. So, again we have some sensation and we get some kind of sensory memory. We then pay attention to that. Now two structures that pay attention to that. The first is the reticular activating system which basically helps to focus attention. The second is the thalamus, which we’ve already talked about. So the thalamus is basically going to develop some kind of memory trace, and the combination of both structures puts that information into short term memory.
Within short term memory, we are processing information. If we’re going to store that memory into long term memory, the Hippocampus takes that memory in short-term memory and converts it into long-term memory located in your cortex.
So, if we damage any one of these particular systems, whether the reticular activating system, the thalamus, the Hippocampus, or the cortex, we have particular types of memory problems. As a result, the neurologist or the neuropsychologist can examine what’s going on and get a pretty good idea about brain damage that you have within the system. So, a variety of brain systems are involved with memory and each of these are very, very important.
In the next section, we’re going to be talking about another aspect of memory and these are what are called depth of processing models, so until that time, we hope that you enjoy your day.

[SUMM]
So the memory that you have is in neither in short term memory or long term memory.
In this section we examine a variety of different brain structures that are involved with memory.
The first major structure that’s involved with memory is what is called the Hippocampus, and the Hippocampus plays a major role in encoding and storing information.
However, your old information remains intact.
When you damage the Hippocampus, you have problems with storing and recall.
He then lesioned the area that disrupted the eye blink response.
As a result, he found that the leg response was affected but the eye blink response was not.
Within short term memory, we are processing information.

[TEXT]
In the last couple of sections we have been examining a variety of different memory aspects. In the two previous sections, we looked at early theories of memory (stage or multiprocess theories). Then we examined some different brain structures that were involved in memory. In this section we begin a discussion of the second major memory model called depth of processing models. As we see in slide two, there are many different types of theorists associated with these models, but the two key papers are by Craik and Lockhart and Craik and Tulving. These are the classic papers that basically set the approach for everything.
Depth of processing models take a different approach than stage theory. In essence, depth of processing models rely on a computer model of memory. In many ways it’s similar to stage theory. However, the major difference is the way people view how the memory storage process occurs. Specifically, theorists believe is it’s a more active process than the passive process described by elaborative rehearsal in the Atkinson and Shiffrin model.
So let’s examine an example of a computer analogy in slide four. In sensory memory, what we have is some kind of sensory memory going in the short term memory and then in the long term memory. If we look at a computer, what we have is some kind of input that moves into random access memory, and then that material is saved in the hard drive. When we want to retrieve the data, the hard drive material is moved to random access memory, and then we can do something with it.
What goes on in memory says Craik and Lockhart is that memories are processed (shown on slide five) not held in storage by some brain structures. Basically, they contend it’s not the storage capacity of the short term memory that’s important, but the amount of information that can be processed at any one particular time. That is, it’s a processing limitation. As a result, it’s very similar to the random access memory limitations that you have within your own computer. That is, you can only have a certain amount of material going on at one time within your computer. And if you exceed that amount the system crashes.
So how does memory enter the system? Or, how does information enter the system? What we see in slide six is called depth of processing. Depth of processing looks at shallow versus deep processing. So what is shallow processing? Well, as we can see in slide seven, shallow processing is basically the superficial characteristics of a stimulus. It is the sound. It doesn’t require a lot of work. You just know that it's there. In contrast, deep processing, as we see in slide eight, refers to determining what the meaning of the sound is. For example, the meaning of the sound that you’re listening from me is all the different words and things about some aspect of learning. There may be other sounds out there as well. In this office I’m hearing a light buzzing in the background, and I hear my computer buzzing as well. So the sound is the shallow processing and determining the meaning of each sound is the deep processing that goes along with that.

[TEXT]
Now there’s a variety of different components that are important within this processing system and these are shown here on slide nine and include organization, chunking of the information, pneumonics, and imagery. Ultimately, all of these components are used within our recognition and our processing of information.
Now there’s some important aspect as well and this begins a discussion of what we call schemas. Schemas, as we see in slide 10, basically help with the processing of the meaning that we have. And in general, the more knowledge you have about a particular object, the easier it is for you to recall. The question then became why? In essence what you do is develop some kind of a framework to recall the particular piece of information you have. So as we see with an example in slide 11, they help you to enhance your memory. So let me give you an example.
Don’t look at the content on the side of this page. What I’d like you to do is identify the following. It’s an animal, it walks on legs, it lives outside, it eats grass, apples and many, many other things. What is it?
Well as you can probably think, there are lots and lots and lots of possibilities. As we can see over the next couple of slides, what you try to do is narrow the possibilities. So when I say. “It says moo,” you know that it’s a cow. But on the other hand, I say that it says “baa,” then we know it’s a sheep. So, as we narrow the possibilities, you have a higher probability of recognizing what the particular thing is.
So, (as we see in slide 14) as we narrow the possibilities, you get better recall with the more associations you have and ultimately the recall you have for a particular object. All of these aspects of schemas represent different and deeper levels or information processing, and the more associations you make the deeper the processing.
Thus, the reason that you perform better on things such as overlearning and other tasks is that the processing and schemas you develop are deeper. We see this on slide 15. In general, organization is related to deep processing. So the more you have, the better off you are. So ultimately as we narrow the possibilities, schemas refer to cognitive structures in which some kind of data events are answered. They’re very broad and there are few specifics that go with them. So how do we get stuff that’s a little bit more specific. Well one of these relates to what we call scripts (which are shown in slide 17).
Scripts are related to schemas, but they describe characteristics of a behavior that occurs within a particular setting. So, I’d like you to think about going into a restaurant and what happens. What’s the script that occurs?
We get to the restaurant and we walk through the door. We are greeted by a receptionist of some sort. 

[TEXT]
The receptionist then takes our name and seats us. If we have to wait for a couple minutes, we sit around. If they have our reservation, we then go to some particular table. After being seated, what happens? The menus are then brought around, we are asked if we want to have some kind of adult beverage, and then we scan the menu and order the particular food. We then eat the food, after it comes. We then engage in some light conversation, and then we pay the bill and leave. So, basically what we see is there is a specific script to what is going on.
Now there’s another aspect of memory that’s important as well and that is what is called spreading activation. The spreading activation concept was developed by Collins and Loftus. Basically what they argue is that words and concepts are linked through complex systems of relationships. These words and concepts are in essence called nodes. The association between nodes are indicated by lines or arrows, and the shorter the line, the stronger the association or link. Thus the stronger the activation. This is what we see in the following figure on slide 19.
Let’s say that we are going to start with the concept of fire engine. In fire engine, what we have is a variety of different links. Some are very short, some are much longer. The short ones are things such as the color “red,” which we always think of as red fire engine. Red also triggers similar concepts of ambulance. It might also trigger a concept such as fire truck. Longer concepts may be the fire house or the actual fire itself and on and on and on. Note that each of these concepts also trigger other things. So when I say the word fire engine, it basically spreads an activation of memories across the brain system and across your memory model.
In general, we have talked about depth of processing models. It is a much more elaborative model of memory and as a result we have a more detailed analysis.
In the next section, we begin to discuss some aspects of other things related to memory, such as forgetting, decay, and retrieval of memories. So until that time, have a great day.

[SUMM]
Then we examined some different brain structures that were involved in memory.
In the two previous sections, we looked at early theories of memory (stage or multiprocess theories).
In essence, depth of processing models rely on a computer model of memory.
In this section we begin a discussion of the second major memory model called depth of processing models.
In the last couple of sections we have been examining a variety of different memory aspects.
Depth of processing models take a different approach than stage theory.
In sensory memory, what we have is some kind of sensory memory going in the short term memory and then in the long term memory.
However, the major difference is the way people view how the memory storage process occurs.
So what is shallow processing?
In many ways it’s similar to stage theory.
Depth of processing looks at shallow versus deep processing.
Red also triggers similar concepts of ambulance.
When we want to retrieve the data, the hard drive material is moved to random access memory, and then we can do something with it.
In general, we have talked about depth of processing models.
As we see in slide two, there are many different types of theorists associeated with these models, but the two key papers are by Craik and Lockhart and Craik and Tulving.
[SEP]

[TEXT]
In the last sections we have examined a wide variety of aspects related to classical and operant, and instrumental conditioning. In this section we begin talking about the last major and the current model of learning that is pretty much used by a lot of people today. These are called cognitive models. So, let’s begin by looking at some of the theorists of cognition which is shown on slide two. As you can see, a lot of the theorists of cognitive psychology relate all the way back to Plato. They include people like Tollman, Hull, and a variety of other people such as Anderson.
In the last sections that we’ve talked about within instrumental and operant conditioning, we talked about some kind of stimulus causing some kind of response. And then following the response by some consequent stimulus. It depended upon the particular approach that one took whether one focused on the initial stimuli or the consequent stimuli following a response.
In cognitive models, what is focused on is not the consequent stimulus or the initial stimulus, but what is going on inside the organism. We will talk about and label that stimulus with an O. So, what goes on inside the organism is the most important thing for cognitive theorists.
So what kind of internal variables are investigated with different cognitive models of learning. These are listed on slide four. (For example, locus of control, expectancy, etc.). So, let’s look at some of these variables a little more closely
The first of these is locus of control and is shown on slide five. In essence locus of control is defined as how much control an individual feels they have over their environment. For Locus of control, the important point is where the control is. For example, if an individual feels they have no control over their environment, (that is they have little connection between the behavior and the rewards), they have what is called a high external locus of control. That is, everything outside of them controls what is going on with their behavior.
Well, individuals with high internal locus of control basically believe that the world is responsive to my actions. That is, everything occurs because of what I do.
Now a second variable that relates to cognitive control and internal variables is what we call self-efficacy. Self-efficacy is the belief that you have in your own ability. That is, the confidence you have that you will succeed at something. So individuals with high self-efficacy believe that they can succeed at anything, whereas individuals with low self-efficacy believe that they can’t succeed at anything at all.
A third variable relates to what we call expectancy, and this is shown in slide seven. Expectancy basically relates to what your expectation about what will happen in a particular situation. For example, if you believe that you will get an A on your exam, you then engage in particular behaviors usually to help you get that A. So it’s your expectation about what will happen is that the most important and is studied by these cognitive learning theorists.

[TEXT]
The next variable that’s examined are what we call personality variables. There are many variables that are examined and some are listed in slide eight. For example, there’s the big five. So let’s walk through each of those beginning on slide nine. The first one is what we call agreeableness. This is the classic example of a personality variable. For example, is the individual sympathetic, warm, trusting, cooperative, etc.
This is a little different from extroversion types of personality variables. Extroversion and introversion basically relate to how talkative, social, fun-loving and affectionate individuals are. If individuals have highly extroverted, they basically walk into a room with anybody and start having a great time, are fun, talkable, and everything else. Or if they are kind of shy and withdrawn, which would be low, this would be introversion. By the way, professors tend to be very introverted for the most part, even though we do do well in certain situations.
Conscientiousness is another personality variable that’s examined. That is, how ethical, dependable, productive, and purposeful you are within a particular environment.
The next variable is shown in slide 12 and relates to what we call neuroticism. Are you anxious, insecure, guilt-prone, self-conscious and on and on. These are a variety of different variables that relate to different aspects of personality that we study in different models of learning.
And finally, how open you are (shown in slide 13). Are you daring, are you non-conforming, do you have lots of interests, are you imaginative, or are you the opposite of each of those.
So again, these are a variety of different personality variables that are aspects of internal variables of cognitive psychology. All of these different things are investigated.
The next major aspect that we look at when we examine internal events relate to what are called traits. The classic person who’s looked at traits is Allport . Allport defines three different major traits that we have. So lets examine these for a minute. Cardinal traits for Allport (as we see in slide 15) are traits that dominate an individual’s life. That is, your passion to serve others, to acquire wealth, or whatever they are. It’s basically things that dominate your life and makes you behave the way you are.
The second type of trait is what we call central traits. These are shown in slide 16. These are descriptive traits that you would use to describe someone. Are they nice, do they dress well, etc.
And finally, we have what are called secondary traits. That is, these are traits that are not obvious, that show up in particular situations. For example, aggressiveness with an individual who’s pretty mellow and cool but when they get to a baseball or a basketball game, they turn into a total monster. These are traits that are not normally obvious to an individual, but show up in particular situations.
So in general when we look at cognitive psychology and cognitive learning, what we look at are internal events that are out there. And basically these internal events are all examined within cognitive models.

[TEXT]
Again within a cognitive model, the focus is on things inside the organism. that is, the mind. And as a consequence of that, the models are much harder to measure than some kind of objective behavior that’s usually discussed by Skinner and others.
So in general what we see here is that we have a variety of different things that relates to cognitive models of learning. In the next section, we will continue on with this discussion, so until then have yourself a great day.

[SUMM]
These are called cognitive models.
As you can see, a lot of the theorists of cognitive psychology relate all the way back to Plato.
Conscientiousness is another personality variable that’s examined.
(For example, locus of control, expectancy, etc.).
And then following the response by some consequent stimulus.
So in general when we look at cognitive psychology and cognitive learning, what we look at are internal events that are out there.
And basically these internal events are all examined within cognitive models.
In the last sections that we’ve talked about within instrumental and operant conditioning, we talked about some kind of stimulus causing some kind of response.
So what kind of internal variables are investigated with different cognitive models of learning.
So individuals with high self-efficacy believe that they can succeed at anything, whereas individuals with low self-efficacy believe that they can’t succeed at anything at all.
In the last sections we have examined a wide variety of aspects related to classical and operant, and instrumental conditioning.
Well, individuals with high internal locus of control basically believe that the world is responsive to my actions.
[SEP]

[TEXT]
In the last section, we talked about a variety of models related to depth of processing. In this section we begin to talk about the last aspect of memory and that is retrieval, forgetting, and recall. So let’s begin with a discussion of forgetting which we start with slide two. The first question one must ask is, “How do we forget information? What happens?” There are many, many different types of theories to answer these questions and listed here. So let’s start talking about the first of these theories called decay theory.
Decay theory, as we see in slide three, is very straightforward. That is, memory traces decay as time passes. The problem is there is little evidence to support decay theory. In addition, as we saw earlier, the Penfield studies show that we don’t have a lot of decay. Information remains in there for a long period of time.
So what’s the second type of theory? Well, as we see in slide four, it is called interference theory. Again, interference theory talks about retrograde interference and proactive interference. In retrograde interference, new learning interferes with our ability to recall old information while proactive interference or old information interferes with our ability to recall new information. The theory contends that memory traces are lost as other memory traces occur before and after the stimulus is present. So, the information is basically blocked.
Now another theory is shown in figure five. It relates to what we call retrieval cues. In general what happens say these theorists is that we have different retrieval cues. Thus we can’t recall the information from where it was before.
So, if we have these problems, how accurate is memory? This begins in slide six. Essentially, memory is often inaccurate. The early studies of really drive home this point. Basically the classic study is by Easterbrook. What Easterbrook found is that as you change arousal in animals, they narrow their attention to particular things. That is a real good defense mechanism. So, for example, if you see the lion over there in the corner of the woods, you don’t really want to be focusing on other things such as the sky. And as that lion gets closer and closer you spend more and more attention to that stimulus. So when you are aroused you narrow your attention.
Easterbrook also contends that humans tend to focus on just a few details and not the entire situation. He calls this the weapon of focus hypothesis. Now there’s a related aspect of this model and that is called the Yerkes-Dodson law. What the Yerkes-Dodson model (shown in slide seven) contends is that there’s an optimal level of arousal for any particular task. In essence performance is poorer at very low levels of arousal or very high levels of arousal. Thus, the optimal level of arousal is in the middle.
So how does all of this stuff apply to memory? Well as we can see in slide eight, higher arousal leads to better retention. But not too much arousal. Because as your arousal increases, you become more and more narrowly focused. Thus you only encode smaller amounts of information. Thus in general, intermediate arousal is best for when you’re trying to recall something.

[TEXT]
So what are the implications for testing and when you take an exam? Well as you can see in slide nine, a little anxiety may actually increase your performance. However, if you have too much anxiety, it is detrimental to your performance.
Now in addition to that, we have other aspects of memory. These are called flashbulb memories. Flashbulb memories are basically sudden significant events that people feel are in your minds forever. There are a variety of different ones out there. The Oklahoma City bombing, September 11 destruction of the World Trade Centers in New York, the Challenger explosion, Mt. St. Helen’s eruption, the Kennedy assassination, and Pearl Harbor are examples. In each of these events, you have are specific memories of what was going on in your mind and what you were doing during each of these particular times. Even today individuals can recall what they were doing when Pearl Harbor was attacked by the Japanese empire in the early 1940s.
Flashbulb memories (as we see in slide 11) are also highly emotionally charged and people vividly recall many details of what was going on when they received the news; where they were, what they were doing, or whom they were with. The problem with these memories, is that they are often distorted. That is, some of the information is forgotten or even inaccurate.
Now the way that you saw the information or the way that you receive the information will also have an implication for flashbulb memories. For example, were you there, or did you see it on TV. If you’re there, the accuracy actually increases. Thus, there may be special cases for increased accuracy under high stress conditions.
The task used to recall information is also important when trying to recall information or get information out. As we discussed earlier, what kind of task are you trying to do? Are you getting a recall task where you have to memorize and flush it? Are you getting a recognition pass such as a multiple choice exam, or relearning task? So lets again review these.
Again as we see in slide 15, a free recall task, you’re recalling words in any order. Again, it is very difficult. The classic example is a “fill in the blank” exam. It can be increased by pneumonic techniques and that can very specifically increase the number of words that you actually recall.
Recognition tasks, again, as we see in slide 17, provide cues. The classic example is the multiple choice test. Again the cues can be anything, they can be words or pictures. The problem is, the more cues, the more difficult it is to recall. I multiple choice exams, the more choices that you have, the harder it is to recall the correct item. Thus a four item multiple choice exam for each question is much easier than an eight item multiple choice exam. Ultimately this relates to false alarms which are part of signal detection theory (which I’m not going to talk about in this section).

[TEXT]
Other problems relate to the cues that are provided. This is shown in slide 19. That is, , the cues will influence the kind of information that you recall. It also depends upon the distracters. Are they very close distracters in recognition tasks or are they very more distant distracters.
Another aspect that will have an impact on memory is the mood the person is in. This is called the mood congruency effect. Eich and Metcalf studied subjects when they were recalled happy or sad words listening to happy or sad music. Basically what they found is the test words they had to recall were better when they matched a study mood. So, happy moods with happy music and sad words with sad music got better recall than when they were mixed. This is shown in slide 21. Basically, happy words with sad music or sad words with happy music had poor recall.
Now, we have a couple of other memory aspects that we need to discuss. The first is what is called reconstructive memory. Reconstructive memory is something very simple. It is basically memories that people try to do inferentially from what they can recall. This can be extremely accurate. So let’s take an example. Tell me what this process is. I’m just going to read this statement.
The procedure is quite simple. First arrange items into different groups, of course, one pile may be sufficient depending on how much there is to do. If you have to go somewhere else due to lack of facilities, that is the next step. Otherwise you’re pretty well set. It is important not to overdue things, that is, it is better to do too few things at once than too many. In the short run, this may not seem important but complications can easily arise and a mistake can be expensive as well.
First the whole procedure may seem complicated. Soon, however, it will become just another facet of life. It is difficult to see any answer the necessity of this task in the immediate future, but then one can never tell and after the procedure is completed, one arranges the material in a different groups then they are placed in their appropriate places. Eventually the process will need to be repeated again, however, this is part of life.
So what you need to do is, since I’ve provided some information to you think what the paragraphs are describing. You can enhance your recall if you provide information about the topic at the beginning of the material. That is, the recall is much better than after reading the material and then trying to figure out what it is. So, what is this simple thing that we have to do?
Well as we can see in slide 25, it’s doing the laundry and once I say doing the laundry, all of those things that I just described a couple slides ago make a lot of sense.

[TEXT]
Now there’s inferential intrusions into recall. This relates to what we call explicit and implicit memories. Explicit memories are basically things that we are consciously aware of when we retrieve them, while implicit memories are memories of experiences you cannot consciously retrieve. So let’s give a couple examples. The first example is shown in slide 28. It is the feeling of knowing something, it’s on the tip of the tongue, such as you can almost recall someone’s name but you’re just not quite able to recall it.
A second example can be where we are fairly accurate. This classic example occurs in game shows where we guess at the answer. Basically, we judge that we know the answer much faster than we can accurately recall.
So in conclusion, there are lots of issues in relation to memory and cognition. As a result, issues related to memory and cognition have lots of implications for school, work load and other situations.

[SUMM]
Thus a four item multiple choice exam for each question is much easier than an eight item multiple choice exam.
That is, memory traces decay as time passes.
So let’s start talking about the first of these theories called decay theory.
Basically, happy words with sad music or sad words with happy music had poor recall.
Decay theory, as we see in slide three, is very straightforward.
Again, interference theory talks about retrograde interference and proactive interference.
The problem is there is little evidence to support decay theory.
These are called flashbulb memories.
In general what happens say these theorists is that we have different retrieval cues.
The theory contends that memory traces are lost as other memory traces occur before and after the stimulus is present.
Explicit memories are basically things that we are consciously aware of when we retrieve them, while implicit memories are memories of experiences you cannot consciously retrieve.
The first is what is called reconstructive memory.
Well, as we see in slide four, it is called interference theory.
So, happy moods with happy music and sad words with sad music got better recall than when they were mixed.
So what’s the second type of theory?
In this section we begin to talk about the last aspect of memory and that is retrieval, forgetting, and recall.
What happens?” There are many, many different types of theories to answer these questions and listed here.
Basically the classic study is by Easterbrook.
Eich and Metcalf studied subjects when they were recalled happy or sad words listening to happy or sad music.
It relates to what we call retrieval cues.
[SEP]

[TEXT]
Different cultures often have entirely different perceptions of time. The cultural anthropologist Edward T. Hall popularized the idea that cultures use time and view time in very different ways. The idea of the past, present, and future—and the whole concept of scheduling or managing time—can be so different that it leads to cross-cultural miscommunications. In Hall’s 1990 book The Dance of Life, Hall writes, “Time is one of the fundamental bases on which all cultures rest and around which all activities revolve. Understanding the difference between monochronic time and polychronic time is essential to success.” Hall’s notion of monochronism and polychronism can be understood as follows. Monochronic time is linear. Events are scheduled one at a time, one event following another. To a monochronic culture, this type of schedule is valued over interpersonal relationships. On the other hand, polychronic time is characterized by many things happening simultaneously. In addition, interpersonal relationships are highly valued in polychronic cultures. Hall’s theory is that monochronic time can be found primarily in North American and Northern European cultures. These cultures emphasize schedules, punctuality, and preciseness. They also emphasize “doing” things. They are cultures that value productivity, that value getting things done “on time.” They view time as something that can be lost, killed, or wasted—or, conversely, they view time as something that can, or should, be managed, planned, and used efficiently. Polychronic time, on the other hand, can be found primarily in Latin American, African, and Native American cultures. Their perception of time is more connected to natural rhythms. It is connected to the earth, to the seasons. This makes sense when we consider that natural events can occur spontaneously, sporadically, or concurrently. Polychronic cultures view time as being somewhat flexible. Since life isn’t so predictable scheduling and being precise simply isn’t that important. In addition, relationships with people are valued more than making schedules. There is more value placed on “being” than on “doing.” Different cultural perceptions of time can lead to conflict, especially in the business world. The idea of being late versus on time for a meeting, for example, might differ widely between an American businessperson and a Brazilian; the American businessperson might be far less tolerant of a Brazilian’s late arrival. However, the Brazilian businessperson might be offended by an American’s insistence on punctuality or on getting right down to business; the Brazilian would generally prefer to finish talking with colleagues first, and would not want to cut a conversation short in order to make an appointment. Some traditional time management programs used in the business world might not translate well in another culture. Traditional time management programs in the business world emphasize to-do lists and careful scheduling. They are monochronic. However, a business in a polychronic culture might not adjust well to that system. Companies who impose these monochronic systems on places of business in polychronic cultures might be guilty of ethnocentrism, which means making their own ethnic or cultural values central and not valuing other values. Edward Hall’s theory of monochronic and polychronic cultures has been challenged by some critics. Some people think it is overly general. They argue that within any cultural group we might find people who think of time differently. In other words, a primarily polychronic culture might have both monochronic and polychronic types of people. The same diversity among individuals might be found in a primarily monochronic culture. Critics of anthropologists like Edward Hall feel that it’s more useful to think of time differences among individuals, not just between cultural groups.

[SUMM]
Different cultures often have entirely different perceptions of time.
Polychronic cultures view time as being somewhat flexible.
The cultural anthropologist Edward T. Hall popularized the idea that cultures use time and view time in very different ways.
The same diversity among individuals might be found in a primarily monochronic culture.
In addition, interpersonal relationships are highly valued in polychronic cultures.
In Hall’s 1990 book The Dance of Life, Hall writes, “Time is one of the fundamental bases on which all cultures rest and around which all activities revolve.
The idea of the past, present, and future—and the whole concept of scheduling or managing time—can be so different that it leads to cross-cultural miscommunications.
These cultures emphasize schedules, punctuality, and preciseness.
Traditional time management programs in the business world emphasize to-do lists and careful scheduling.
On the other hand, polychronic time is characterized by many things happening simultaneously.
To a monochronic culture, this type of schedule is valued over interpersonal relationships.
The idea of being late versus on time for a meeting, for example, might differ widely between an American businessperson and a Brazilian; the American businessperson might be far less tolerant of a Brazilian’s late arrival.
Edward Hall’s theory of monochronic and polychronic cultures has been challenged by some critics.
Critics of anthropologists like Edward Hall feel that it’s more useful to think of time differences among individuals, not just between cultural groups.
Some traditional time management programs used in the business world might not translate well in another culture.
There is more value placed on “being” than on “doing.” Different cultural perceptions of time can lead to conflict, especially in the business world.
Polychronic time, on the other hand, can be found primarily in Latin American, African, and Native American cultures.
They also emphasize “doing” things.
In other words, a primarily polychronic culture might have both monochronic and polychronic types of people.
Monochronic time is linear.
[SEP]

[TEXT]
Psychologists have many theories to explain how we remember information. The most influential theory is that memory works as a kind of storage system, or storehouse, for information. According to this theory, there are three types of these storage systems with different functions that hold information for different amounts of time. These storage systems are sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory. Sensory memory holds information for the shortest amount of time—less than four seconds. An instant. Sensory memory is where stimuli, or things that stimulate our senses, are very briefly stored. We forget sensory memories almost instantly, unless they pass into another storage system. Examples of stimuli that usually go into sensory memory are things that we see and hear in the world such as a flash of lightning, or the sound of a door closing. Short-term memory, which is also sometimes called “working memory,” holds information for about 15 to 25 seconds. This is not a very long time, but the information that passes into this system has more meaning for us than just sensory stimulation. It is not entirely clear how some sensory memories transfer into more meaningful short-term memories. Some experts believe that sensory information changes into visual images as it is stored, and others believe that information changes into words. However, it has been proven that memory going into this system is made up of “chunks,” or groups, of meaningful information (for example, single letters or numbers or more complicated sets of information), and that only around seven “chunks” of information can be stored in short-term memory. Therefore, there is not a lot of room for information in short-term memory, and it does not stay there for very long. Examples of the type of information that typically goes into short-term memory are telephone numbers, addresses, and names. Long-term memory holds information almost indefinitely, although retrieving it can sometimes be difficult. Think of long-term memory as a very big library, or even a computer chip, with almost unlimited capacities for storage. Information gets filed, catalogued, and stored. Long-term memory has several different components, or modules, that correspond to separate memory systems in the brain. The main two categories of long-term memory are declarative memory and procedural memory. Declarative memory is where we store factual information, such as names, faces, dates, life events. Procedural memory is where we store memory of skills and habits, like how to ride a bike or how to boil an egg. Within declarative memory, there are smaller categories of memory, or subdivisions—episodic memory and semantic memory. Episodic memory is where we place memories that relate to our personal lives, things we have done or experienced, such as having a car accident, celebrating an important birthday, or graduating from school. Semantic memory is where we organize general knowledge or facts about the world, such as math formulas, spelling rules, and capital cities.

[SUMM]
These storage systems are sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory.
Within declarative memory, there are smaller categories of memory, or subdivisions—episodic memory and semantic memory.
The main two categories of long-term memory are declarative memory and procedural memory.
The most influential theory is that memory works as a kind of storage system, or storehouse, for information.
Sensory memory holds information for the shortest amount of time—less than four seconds.
It is not entirely clear how some sensory memories transfer into more meaningful short-term memories.
Some experts believe that sensory information changes into visual images as it is stored, and others believe that information changes into words.
Short-term memory, which is also sometimes called “working memory,” holds information for about 15 to 25 seconds.
Long-term memory holds information almost indefinitely, although retrieving it can sometimes be difficult.
According to this theory, there are three types of these storage systems with different functions that hold information for different amounts of time.
We forget sensory memories almost instantly, unless they pass into another storage system.
Psychologists have many theories to explain how we remember information.
Procedural memory is where we store memory of skills and habits, like how to ride a bike or how to boil an egg.
Long-term memory has several different components, or modules, that correspond to separate memory systems in the brain.
Sensory memory is where stimuli, or things that stimulate our senses, are very briefly stored.
Semantic memory is where we organize general knowledge or facts about the world, such as math formulas, spelling rules, and capital cities.
Declarative memory is where we store factual information, such as names, faces, dates, life events.
Think of long-term memory as a very big library, or even a computer chip, with almost unlimited capacities for storage.
However, it has been proven that memory going into this system is made up of “chunks,” or groups, of meaningful information (for example, single letters or numbers or more complicated sets of information), and that only around seven “chunks” of information can be stored in short-term memory.
Examples of the type of information that typically goes into short-term memory are telephone numbers, addresses, and names.
[SEP]

[TEXT]
In the last class, we discussed the nature of groups: how they are formed, and what characteristics they have in common. Today we will focus on two particular types of groups: what sociologists call “ingroups” and “outgroups.” Let’s clarify the definitions of each type of group, and then we’ll look at some examples. First of all, what is an ingroup? Most of us are members, on some level, of at least one ingroup. These are people with whom you feel a close attachment or connection, with whom you identify strongly. An example of an ingroup could be a person’s family, or a close group of friends. Members of an ingroup may all dress in a similar style, or listen to similar music, or use a similar way of speaking—they may even have their own specialized words for certain things. However, ingroups typically define themselves not just in relation to the members of that group, but in relation to other groups that are different from the ingroup. These other groups, in contrast to the ingroup, are called outgroups. An outgroup is a group that is viewed from the perspective of an ingroup, often in negative terms. Members of an ingroup may feel a sense of difference or separateness from the outgroup. They may feel excluded. They may even feel a strong sense of opposition or conflict with the outgroup—or even hatred. Outgroups help to define ingroups by providing the ingroup with a sense of identity against or in opposition to them. The ingroup may magnify, or emphasize, certain characteristics that make them distinctly different from the outgroup. In other words, one person’s ingroup is another person’s outgroup. To illustrate, members of a neighborhood gang may wear certain types of clothing to differentiate themselves from rival gangs, or from non-gang members—members of the dominant or mainstream culture. 

[TEXT]
As another example—and an even more extreme one—countries or cultures at war may emphasize their difference from the country they are at war with, in order to increase unity and loyalty in their ingroup. This leads to an “us versus them” mentality, that, in turn, can increase any existing conflict even as it strengthens the ingroup’s sense of identity. Ingroups and outgroups tend to view one another in very separate terms, and they usually have little or no interaction with each other. As a result, these groups don’t have a lot of real information or firsthand experience with one another. And as a consequence of the lack of information, they rely heavily on stereotypes and misinformation about each other. The stereotypes then reinforce the ingroup’s mistrust of or hatred toward the outgroup. Indeed, ingroups and outgroups come into conflict most frequently over symbolic representations of the groups: objects or places that hold a great deal of meaning for one group, and that symbolize, or stand for, the group in some way. An obvious example of this can be seen in how one country may seek to destroy a flag, a statue, or a building that represents a country it is at war with. During the conflict in Iraq, for example, a statue of Saddam Hussein was toppled and dragged through the streets as a symbol of an outgroup. Destroying the objects and symbols associated with one group can be a way of imagining that they are destroying the group itself. It’s important to clarify, however, that the symbol itself isn’t the cause of the conflict—it’s the meaning attached to the symbol, a point at which members of an ingroup can express their identity as distinct from the outgroup, and a point at which the ingroup can act out its emotions toward an opposing group.

[SUMM]
Today we will focus on two particular types of groups: what sociologists call “ingroups” and “outgroups.” Let’s clarify the definitions of each type of group, and then we’ll look at some examples.
In the last class, we discussed the nature of groups: how they are formed, and what characteristics they have in common.
In other words, one person’s ingroup is another person’s outgroup.
An example of an ingroup could be a person’s family, or a close group of friends.
The ingroup may magnify, or emphasize, certain characteristics that make them distinctly different from the outgroup.
Members of an ingroup may all dress in a similar style, or listen to similar music, or use a similar way of speaking—they may even have their own specialized words for certain things.
Members of an ingroup may feel a sense of difference or separateness from the outgroup.
Destroying the objects and symbols associated with one group can be a way of imagining that they are destroying the group itself.
However, ingroups typically define themselves not just in relation to the members of that group, but in relation to other groups that are different from the ingroup.
These are people with whom you feel a close attachment or connection, with whom you identify strongly.
During the conflict in Iraq, for example, a statue of Saddam Hussein was toppled and dragged through the streets as a symbol of an outgroup.
This leads to an “us versus them” mentality, that, in turn, can increase any existing conflict even as it strengthens the ingroup’s sense of identity.
Outgroups help to define ingroups by providing the ingroup with a sense of identity against or in opposition to them.
It’s important to clarify, however, that the symbol itself isn’t the cause of the conflict—it’s the meaning attached to the symbol, a point at which members of an ingroup can express their identity as distinct from the outgroup, and a point at which the ingroup can act out its emotions toward an opposing group.
They may even feel a strong sense of opposition or conflict with the outgroup—or even hatred.
[SEP]

[TEXT]
How important is it for people to contribute to society in some way? After the tragedy of 9/11, some people have become preoccupied with this question. Tragedies have a way of making people rethink their values and find a new focus. They make people think, on some level, about what a society needs in order to survive. Not just basic needs like food, clothing, and shelter, but deeper needs, relating to the health and values of society. Many people find themselves asking: how can I find more meaning in our society? What can I do to make a difference? For some, these questions may lead to practical decisions; others ask these questions and find themselves setting foot on a more spiritual path. The notion of doing something to take control of society or of our fate as humans is not something that developed just after 9/11. We might date this impulse back to ancient times, when the Greeks believed that humans were subservient to the gods, and that both gods and humans were powerless under fate. What was fated to happen was going to happen, and there was nothing that they could do about it. However, this way of thinking changed, arguably, with the rise of the great city of Athens. The social critic John Ralston Saul reminds us of how the Greeks constructed both new styles of buildings and new structures of civilization. The Greeks began to believe in the power of ingenuity, or the notion that creative, imaginative thinking could lead to humans’ ability to shape their own futures. They could use their own ingenuity, and the tools at hand, to make life better. They did not have to be subject to fate. Their thinking changed, in other words, from a passive approach to an active one. Perhaps somewhere in the late 20th century we began to lose sight of this active way of thinking. According to John Ralston Saul, the notion of “fate” returned with new faces— globalization, the market, or even technology. People in Western society began to feel powerless in the face of these large, looming forces that were shaping our society for us. Now, in the early 21st century, we may be seeing another change similar to the ones that the Greeks experienced, according to another cultural critic, Jon Spayde. In the wake of 9/11, perceiving a need for significant social change and new values, people who call themselves “social inventors” are trying to take back some control over society’s direction once again. A social inventor is not necessarily a social activist. An activist fights for social change. Nor is a social inventor a social contributor; a social contributor might be someone who supports social causes financially, or emotionally. And finally, a social inventor is not necessarily someone who works in a high-tech industry or invents new technologies and consumer products. 

[TEXT]
A social inventor is different because he or she is using the power of ingenuity, or creative thinking, to come up with ideas for change in certain communities or sections of society. Social inventors have a vision of a better world and create new systems or practices. Their ideas may seem offbeat or impossible. Most social inventors are not famous or wealthy because of their inventions. They are usually quite ordinary people; they may even be people you know. Or we may never know who they are. But some of these creative thinkers have powerfully, and quietly, changed the way we live. Some examples of social inventions may sound familiar to you. The organization of “Alcoholics Anonymous,” a support group for people with addiction to alcohol, was founded in 1935 and has been going strong ever since. This was a social invention because an individual named Bill Smith, himself a recovering alcoholic, came up with a 12-step process for creating personal change. The idea caught on, communities and support groups formed around it, and millions of alcoholics have changed their lives ever since. Another example of a social invention is the organization Amnesty International, which was founded in 1961. A British lawyer named Peter Benenson wrote an editorial after two Portuguese students were imprisoned for toasting freedom in a café, and the international organization to support human rights began. Now millions of people around the world write letters to protest human rights violations. Social inventions do not have to be organizations, however. Sometimes they are new designs for neighborhoods or communities, allowing for more interaction among people. Sometimes they are systems, like new ways to help prisoners in jails receive an education or re-enter society. Sometimes they are very simple ideas, examples of new ways of thinking or “thinking outside the box” to solve problems. For example, some movie theatres in Boston and New York have recently started implementing a social invention to solve the problem of babies crying in movie theatres. To accommodate parents with babies, who would like to keep up with current movies, some theatres now offer special “mother’s hours,” a daytime showing of a film in which they are free to bring babies or young children. The lights are not turned down as low so that they can keep an eye on their children while they watch the movie. The idea of social inventions or social ingenuity has become so popular in recent years that “Idea Banks” of social inventions have shown up on the World Wide Web, books have been published on the subject, and Institutes have been founded. The Institute for Social Inventions, based in London, connects think tanks and idea banks throughout Europe. It has a website that invites ideas from anyone and that I’ll write here on the board: www.globalideasbank.org. You can search this website by category to see the types of ideas that ordinary people come up with. Looking at a wide range of them gives you some sense of the extent to which people desire to make a difference in our society and not remain powerless.

[SUMM]
Nor is a social inventor a social contributor; a social contributor might be someone who supports social causes financially, or emotionally.
They make people think, on some level, about what a society needs in order to survive.
A social inventor is not necessarily a social activist.
Not just basic needs like food, clothing, and shelter, but deeper needs, relating to the health and values of society.
The social critic John Ralston Saul reminds us of how the Greeks constructed both new styles of buildings and new structures of civilization.
How important is it for people to contribute to society in some way?
An activist fights for social change.
Social inventions do not have to be organizations, however.
The idea of social inventions or social ingenuity has become so popular in recent years that “Idea Banks” of social inventions have shown up on the World Wide Web, books have been published on the subject, and Institutes have been founded.
Tragedies have a way of making people rethink their values and find a new focus.
However, this way of thinking changed, arguably, with the rise of the great city of Athens.
Some examples of social inventions may sound familiar to you.
And finally, a social inventor is not necessarily someone who works in a high-tech industry or invents new technologies and consumer products.
Now millions of people around the world write letters to protest human rights violations.
The Institute for Social Inventions, based in London, connects think tanks and idea banks throughout Europe.
A British lawyer named Peter Benenson wrote an editorial after two Portuguese students
were imprisoned for toasting freedom in a café, and the international organization to support human rights began.
For example, some movie theatres in Boston and New York have recently started implementing a social invention to solve the problem of babies crying in movie theatres.
After the tragedy of 9/11, some people have become preoccupied with this question.
According to John Ralston Saul, the notion of “fate” returned with new faces— globalization, the market, or even technology.
Social inventors have a vision of a better world and create new systems or practices.
People in Western society began to feel powerless in the face of these large, looming forces that were shaping our society for us.
Their thinking changed, in other words, from a passive approach to an active one.
Most social inventors are not famous or wealthy because of their inventions.
What was fated to happen was going to happen, and there was nothing that they could do about it.
Perhaps somewhere in the late 20th century we began to lose sight of this active way of thinking.
[SEP]

[TEXT]
Everyone experiences stress on some level every day. Stress, broadly defined, is our response to
events that we perceive as threatening or challenging. We may experience different levels of
stress depending on the stressors, meaning the events or circumstances that cause us to feel stress.
Of course, not everyone perceives the same events or circumstances as stressful; we don’t
always react the same way to the same stressors. In fact, something that is extremely stressful
for one person may be exciting and non-stressful for another. In general, though, stressful
events can be classified into three main categories: cataclysmic events, personal stressors, and
background stressors. Cataclysmic events are major events that cause stress suddenly, immediately, for a great many people at once. Examples of these are earthquakes, fires, or other disasters. Personal stressors are major life events that create stress. They can include the death of a loved one, a job loss, a divorce, a financial setback, or a geographical move. They are not always events that we would perceive as negative; many “joyful” life events can also cause a great
deal of stress. For example, getting engaged or married, acquiring a new family member
(through birth or adoption), starting a new job, and even taking a vacation can all be as stressful as “negative” life events. Finally, background stressors—which we can also think of as dayto-day hassles, or minor irritations—can cause stress, particularly when they add up, when we
are repeatedly exposed to them. Examples of background stressors are waiting in a long line,
getting stuck in a traffic jam, being exposed to noise, experiencing a delay of some sort, or
dealing with broken equipment. Examples of chronic background stressors—and the kind that
can lead to long-term health problems—include being unhappy with one’s job, living environment, marriage, or relationship. Stress is not something that only exists in our mind. Repeated exposure to stressors hasboth psychological and biological consequences. When we are exposed to stressors, our adrenal glands secrete certain hormones, and our heart rate and blood pressure rise. We experience a “fight or flight” response, a sense of emergency, where the body prepares to defend itself. This is useful in some situations, especially where we might actually need to defend ourselves. In the long run, though, this activation of what is known as the sympathetic nervous system has negative effects and reduces our capacity to manage stress. When stress hormones are constantly secreted, and the body is continually preparing for emergencies, body tissues such as the heart and blood vessels can begin to deteriorate. The immune system functions less effectively, and reduces our ability to fight off illnesses. Some people who complain of repeated exposure to
highly stressful circumstances tend to report the following types of symptoms: aches and pains
(headaches and backaches are common), skin rashes, digestive problems, and fatigue. The General Adaptation Syndrome, or G.A.S., explains the sequence of physiological reactions to stress. There are three phases to G.A.S. The first is the “alarm and mobilization” phase. This is when we first become aware of a stressor. When we respond with alarm, we may feel upset or confused. 

[TEXT]
We may even feel a sense of panic or fear. After that, however, we may begin to mobilize our efforts—in other words, to take action to remove the stressor. For example, if you received a mid-semester report stating that your grades were all very low, you might worry at first, but then you would probably make plans to reverse the situation, to improve your grades. It is during this first phase that the sympathetic nervous system is activated and the body responds with a sense of emergency.
The second phase of G.A.S. is the resistance stage, which occurs if the stressor is not removed. This is the stage when we fight against the stressor or try to cope with the stressor.
The attempt to mobilize and remove the source of stress from phase one can result in further
stress. For example, if you were studying long hours to try to improve low grades, you might
succeed in improving the grades but create more stress in the process. This can lead to the third G.A.S. phase: exhaustion. In this phrase, if resistance was not successful and stressors still exist, our ability to fight or cope with the stressor diminishes. At this point, symptoms of stress manifest themselves psychologically and biologically. Psychologically, we may become irritable, short-tempered, or unable to focus. There may be a sense of being completely overwhelmed and unable to function. Biologically, our bodies may react with such symptoms as aches and pains, fatigue, or illnesses. Interestingly, the exhaustion phrase may actually be an extreme way of trying to avoid the stressors. The body may be telling us that we need to take a break, that we need to do whatever is necessary to remove ourselves
from the stressor.

[SUMM]
Personal stressors are major life events that create stress.
Cataclysmic events are major events that cause stress suddenly, immediately, for a great many people at once.
We may experience different levels of stress depending on the stressors, meaning the events or circumstances that cause us to feel stress.
In general, though, stressful events can be classified into three main categories: cataclysmic events, personal stressors, and background stressors.
Of course, not everyone perceives the same events or circumstances as stressful; we don’t always react the same way to the same stressors.
Stress, broadly defined, is our response to events that we perceive as threatening or challenging.
Everyone experiences stress on some level every day.
This is useful in some situations, especially where we might actually need to defend ourselves.
Biologically, our bodies may react with such symptoms as aches and pains, fatigue, or illnesses.
They are not always events that we would perceive as negative; many “joyful” life events can also cause a great deal of stress.
For example, getting engaged or married, acquiring a new family member (through birth or adoption), starting a new job, and even taking a vacation can all be as stressful as “negative” life events.
is the resistance stage, which occurs if the stressor is not removed.
In the long run, though, this activation of what is known as the sympathetic nervous system has negative effects and reduces our capacity to manage stress.
When stress hormones are constantly secreted, and the body is continually preparing for emergencies, body tissues such as the heart and blood vessels can begin to deteriorate.
Interestingly, the exhaustion phrase may actually be an extreme way of trying to avoid the stressors.
Finally, background stressors—which we can also think of as dayto-day hassles, or minor irritations—can cause stress, particularly when they add up, when we are repeatedly exposed to them.
Examples of background stressors are waiting in a long line, getting stuck in a traffic jam, being exposed to noise, experiencing a delay of some sort, or dealing with broken equipment.
It is during this first phase that the sympathetic nervous system is activated and the body responds with a sense of emergency.
The second phase of G.A.S.
[SEP]






